! line endswith *, somewhat related to the root
! line endswith #, not related to the root at all
! line endswith @, is not a lemma  DONE
! line endswith ^, definition is probably wrong LATER
! line begins with / then skip over it, do nothing to it DONE
! line ends with ? then could not be classified due to unknown definition DONE
! line ends with % and begins with __ means it's an IE root or fake root DONE
! if there are . in words then these represent double prefixes  LATER
! if a line ends with cc then it should be capitalizedDONE
! if line begins and ends with __ then it is a prefix DONE
! if a morpheme is distinguished from another due to vowel length, then it is placed a second time between ( ) with the vowel length HALFDONE
! if a morpheme is of dubious origin then ?? is placed after it DONE
! in some words beginning with 'tran' the 'n' is the first letter of a root beginning with 'n' e.g. tranauigo  LATER
! from offzz onwards all morphemes are wrong unless ending with $  DONE
! if ends with ;; then the definition was altered LATER
! If line starts with __ and ends with # then it's not a morpheme
__digital
c. digitabulum
interdigitalia -- excrescences, between the fingers
__intelleg
to come to know, see into, perceive, understand, discern, comprehend, gather, Colloq., I understand, take, To understand, be master of, criticise so keenly, To see, perceive, discern
praeintellego -- - tr. - Boet. comprendre d'avance, prévoir.
subintellego -- to understand, perceive a little, med.
adintellego -- - tr. - comprendre avec.
cointellego -- tr., comprendre en même temps
__mine
distinguished men % a distinctive feature, conspicuous part, The lights
supereminentia -- supereminence
praeeminentia -- pre-eminence
__humeral
a covering for the shoulders, a, cape
superhumerale -- Hier. l'éphode (vêtement du grand prêtre des Juifs).
__intend
to stretch out, reach forth, extend
subterintendo -- to look askance
__uolut
to roll, turn, twist, tumble about, wallows, prostrate, to roll, roll about, roll along, to wallow, luxuriate, wallow.&mdash;To busy, occupy, employ, To turn over, revolve, consider, weight, ponder, discuss % a volute, spiral scroll
circumuolutor -- to roll over
circumuoluto -- to roll around, pass., mid.
conuoluto -- to whirl, roll round rapidly
conuolutor -- passif, se rouler avec
peruoluto -- to turn over, peruse
inuoluto -- to inwrap, infold
obuolutor -- se rouler.
__scholar
the imperial guard
antescholarius -- sous-maître, répétiteur.
__spect
to look on, look at, behold, gaze at, watch, observe, inspect, attend, gaze upon, to look at, see, look on, attend, to look, face, front, lie, be situated, lies towards the north-west, to look at, behold, see, regard, consider, To look to, keep in view, bear in mind, aim at, strive for, meditate, consider, relies on, To tend, incline, refer, pertain, be directed, relate, To examine, try, test, judge, prove, as tried by fire % look, appearance, aspect
circumspecto -- to look about with attention, search around, look after, to look about, on the lookout for
introspecto -- to look into
introspectus -- action de regarder dans
prospecto -- to look forth, look out, look at, view, behold, see after off, gaze upon, to command, look towards, lie towards, to look for, expect, hope, look out for, await, await
conspectus -- a seeing, look, sight, view, range of sight, power of vision, before the eyes, before all eyes, notice, Presence, proximity, countenance, sight, banish from, your assembled presence, Appearance, a mental view, glance, survey, consideration, contemplation
perspecto -- To look at, behold to the end
despecto -- to look down upon, To overlook, command, To despise
despectus -- a looking down upon, view, prospect, points of view, An object of contempt
inspecto -- to look at, observe, view, P. praes., before their very eyes
respecto -- to look back, look round, gaze about, fall back, To fix the look, gaze at, look upon, to look back for, await, expect, To look back, have an eye to, regard, care for
respectus -- a looking back, looking about, the view behind them, A refuge, retreat, resort, asylum, respect, regard, consideration, by attention to private interests, for my sake
suspecto -- to look up at, gaze upon, observe, To mistrust, suspect
suspector -- - dép. tr. - Amm. soupçonner.
exspecto -- to look out for, await, wait for
aspecto -- to look at attentively, gaze upon, to look towards, overlook, to heed
aspectus -- a seeing, looking at, sight, view, glance, look, sight, Appearance, look, Aspect, mien, countenance
__strep
to make a noise, rattle, rustle, rumble, murmur, hum, roar, Of places, to resound, sound, be filled, ring, Fig., to be heard
circumstrepo -- to make a noise around, din about, To shout clamorously around
interstrepo -- to make a noise among, to sound in the midst of
constrepo -- to make a loud noise; to resound; to sound loudly/boisterously (L+S); (of vivid speech);
perstrepo -- to make much noise
substrepo -- ein wenig ertönen lassen, -hören lassen
obstrepo -- to make a noise against, roar at, resound, re&euml;cho
adstrepo -- to make a noise at, to shout in support, to take up a cry; to assail with noise; to murmur;
instrepo -- to resound, rattle, creak
__posit
contrapositum -- antithesis
praepositus -- a prefect, president, chief*
praeposita -- a prioress, abbess*
propositum -- that which is proposed, a plan, intention, design, resolution, purpose, to attain, An aim, main point, principal subject, theme, plan of life, the first premise, a general principle
depositum -- a deposit, trust, bailment, fail of a harvest
appositum -- - 1 - épithète. - 2 - apposition.
expositum -- - 1 - majeure (du syllogisme) - 2 - Sen. au plur. les dehors (d'une villa).*
exposita -- the open parts, those exposed to view
opposita -- opposite, contradictory propositions, opposites
repositum -- réserve, épargnes.*
impositus -- P. of impono@
__princip
a beginning, commencement, origin, in beginning my speech, adverb., at the beginning, in the beginning, at first, in the first place, from the beginning, from the first, beginnings, foundations, principles, elements, elements, That which begins, a leader, founder, was the first to vote, the foremost ranks, front lines of soldiers, front, van, in the rear, to the rear, the headquarters, principal place, general's quarters % A company, division of the, of the first company of the % The foremost ranks, the front line, the front, van % to begin to speak, to begin, commence % to rule % herrschen
postprincipia -- continuance, course, progress, sequel
__lamb
to lick, lap, touch, To flow by, wash, bathe, lick, play upon, washes, fondles % c. lambo.
praeterlambo -- to lick, bathe, touch in passing, to flow by
circumlambo -- to lick around
praelambo -- to lick beforehand
perlambo -- lécher partout.
adlambo -- to lick at, on, to lick, to touch, come in contact with
delambo -- to lick off, to lick
relambo -- to lick again
elambo -- to lick away, remove
__uert
to turn, turn up, turn back, direct, emptied, is situated, directs his attack, to turn, turn back, to be turned, be directed, face, look, To turn about, be engaged, move, be, be situated, To turn back, turn about, reverse, wheeled about, fled, put to flight, To turn over, turn up, revolves, To turn, ply, drive, to turn, direct, convert, appropriate, are driven, making a matter of religious scruple, inclined towards, prosper, To ascribe, refer, impute as a fault.&mdash;Pass., to turn, depend, rest, hang, the question was discussed, To turn, change, alter, transform, convert, metamorphose, had dissipated, solum, to change abode, leave the country, to turn, translate, interpret, To turn, overturn, overthrow, subvert, destroy, To turn, change, be changed, To turn, be directed, turn out, result, turn out badly, the returning year, space of a year, full year, the great cycle of the stars
praeteruerto -- to go, pass by
circumuerto -- to turn around, revolve on:
interuerto -- to turn aside, divert, intercept, embezzle, squander
retrouerto -- tr., retourner, renverser
transuerto -- to turn, direct across, athwart
praeuerto -- to go before, precede, outstrip, outrun
praeuertor -- to outstrip, pass, to arrive first, to despatch first, attend to in preference, prefer, let us first look at this
anteuerto -- to take a place before, go before, precede:
conuerto -- to turn round, cause to turn, turn back, reverse, direct
subuerto -- to turn upside down, upset, overturn, overthrow
peruerto -- to turn around, about, to overturn, overthrow, throw down
prouerto -- to turn forwards, turned forwards, straightforwards
trauerto -- - tr. - 1 - changer en, transformer. - 2 - Tert. détourner, écarter. - 3 - Vulg. bouleverser.
aduerto -- to turn to, turn towards, direct:
deuerto -- to turn away, turn aside, turn in, put up, betake oneself, go to lodge
inuerto -- to turn upside down, turn about, upset, invert, reverse
obuerto -- to turn towards, turn against, direct towards
reuerto -- rent
reuertor -- to turn back, turn about, come back, return
diuertium -- e
diuerto -- to turn, go different ways, to part, separate, turn aside, verb. finit.
abuerto -- to turn, away from a place, to avert, turn off, remove
auerto -- to turn away, avert, turn off, remove:
auerta -- a portmanteau, saddle-bags#
euerto -- to overturn, upturn, turn upside down
__stern
to spread out, spread abroad, stretch out, extend, strew, scatter, strew, stretch, lie down, To spread out, flatten, smooth, level, to calm, moderate, To cover, spread, bestrew, to cover, spread, prepare, arrange, make, to cover, lay, pave, to saddle, To throw down, stretch out, lay low, throw to the ground, overthrow, prostrate, raze, level, to cast down, prostrate % to sneeze, sputter, crackle, To give by sneezing
subtersterno -- to spread under, strew under
intersterno -- to strew, lay between, among, part. pass.
supersterno -- bove^
praesterno -- to strew, spread beforehand, to prepare, Pass.
prosterno -- to strew before, spread out, cast down, throw to the ground, overthrow, prostrate
substerno -- to strew under, scatter below, spread beneath
consterno -- to confound, perplex, terrify, alarm, affright, dismay*
persterno -- to pave throughout*
desterno -- to free from its covering, to unsaddle, ungird
exsterno -- to drive beside one's self, to terrify greatly, affright
insterno -- to cover, cover over, spread upon
obsterno -- to strew, cast before, to throw in one's way
asterno -- to strew on, throw themselves down upon
__habit
to dwell, abide, reside, live, on the high-road, be housed, so splendidly, that the moon is inhabited, To be habitually, stay, remain, dwell, keep, frequent, in public, to abide, linger, dwell upon % a condition, state, plight, habit, deportment, appearance, presence, mien, aspect, condition, habit, appearance, quality, Dress, attire, the toga, quality, nature, character, A state of feeling, disposition, moral culture % - intr. - avoir telle manière d'être; [av. abl.] être pourvu de. % to bring into a condition, habit, pass., to be constituted, conditioned, to be in any condition, habit
circumhabito -- int., habiter dans le voisinage
100
inhabito -- to dwell in, inhabit, occupy; to wear (garments) (L+S);
cohabito -- to dwell together
adhabito -- 
__intellig
to come to know, see into, perceive, understand, discern, comprehend, gather, Colloq., I understand, take, To understand, be master of, criticise so keenly, To see, perceive, discern
subintelligo -- - tr. - apprendre par des bruits confus, comprendre un peu, supposer, soupçonner, présumer.
__annot
to observe, remark:
subterannoto -- tr., noter en dessous
__custod
a watching, watch, guard, care, protection, oversight, as a body-guard, A guard, watch, sentinel, collect., A guarded place, guard-house, watch-station, A watching, guarding, custody, restraint, ward, confinement, under arrest without imprisonment, surveillance, A place of confinement, prison, hold, keep % to watch, protect, keep, defend, guard, be garrisoned, hoard, are on the watch, To keep, preserve, regard, heed, To hold back, preserve, keep, watch.&mdash;To hold in custody, hold captive
supercustodio -- zum Überfluß noch beobachten
praecustodio -- vor - etwas hüten
concustodio -- to watch over/carefully, guard, protect;
__umeral
a covering for the shoulders, a, cape
superumerale -- the upper garment of a Jewish priest, an ephod
__uect
to bear, carry, convey, ride, to ride
circumuector -- to ride about, sail around, to go through, describe
circumuecto -- to carry around
superuector -- to pass, hover over
transuecto -- tr., transporter
subuecto -- to support and carry, hold up and convey, transport
conuecto -- to carry together, heap together
aduecto -- to keep bringing, import continually*
deuecto -- to carry away
reuecto -- to carry back again
euecto -- fréq. de eveho,
__prehend
to lay hold of, grasp, snatch, seize, catch, take, To seize, take violent possession of, occupy, enter, take refuge in, reach, To catch, hold, check, stop, arrest, detain, To catch, seize, surprise, overtake, to apprehend, comprehend
comprehendo -- to bind together, unite:
deprehendo -- to take away, seize upon, catch, snatch
reprehendo -- to hold back, hold fast, take hold of, seize, catch
apprehendo -- to seize, take hold of:
__plac
to plead; % - 1 - agrément, satisfaction, volonté, désir, souhait. - 2 - résolution, décision, règle, précepte; ordonnance (du médecin).
beneplacitum -- good pleasure, gracious purpose
__amic
a female friend, A mistress, concubine % to throw around, wrap about, to cover, wrap, surround % a loved one, loving one, friend, the most of his friends, A patron, protector, A companion, colleague, a friend, ally, a counsellor, courtier, minister % to make friendly to one's self % agir en ami
conamicus -- der Mitfreund
__aper
to uncover, lay bare, with bared breast, with his throat cut, bring to light, with bared breasts, To open, uncover, unclose, make visible, discover, display, show, reveal, as an asylum, discloses, comes in sight, while the fleet was still hidden behind them, for the utterance of, to begin, to cleave, to lay open, render accessible, to disclose, unveil, reveal, make known, unfold, explain, expose, to disclose the future, show what they are, betray himself
circumaperio -- - tr. - ouvrir (chirur.).
interaperio -- - tr. - entrouvrir.
subaperio -- to open from within
adaperio -- to throw open, open wide, lay open:
exaperio -- to open wide, throw open
__curs
to run hither and thither, run constantly % a running, course, way, march, passage, voyage, journey, at full speed, advance at a run, rushed, right onward, sort of race, in racing, flight, half-way across, a course, way, flow, movement, A passage, a fair wind, a course, progress, direction, way, passage, access, succession, in a breath, is permanent, from virtue
circumcurso -- to run around, run about:
intercursus -- a running between, intervention, interposition
intercurso -- to run in, intervene
concursus -- a running together, concourse, throng, mob, tumult, An assault, onset, attack, charge, assaults, thunder, a dashing together, encountering, meeting, concourse, collision, a harsh combination. &mdash; A combination, union, coincidence
concurso -- to run to and fro, run about, fly around, travel about, to ramble about, visit, traverse, frequent, To fight irregularly, skirmish
discurso -- to run about, hasten up and down
discursus -- a running to and fro, running about, straggling, a double flank movement
percurso -- to rove about
procurso -- to keep up sallies, continue skirmishing
procursus -- a running forth, running on, whirled furiously onward, A sally, onset
incurso -- to run into, run against, strike against, assault, attack, run upon, will vent itself
incursus -- a running to, hurried approach, rush, dash, An assault, attack, onset, at the very first onset, an impulse, effort
occursus -- a meeting, falling in with, acc, acc, where they met nobody, by striking a stump*
occurso -- to run to meet, throng before, beware of meeting, To rush against, attack, charge, strive against, oppose, opposing
recurso -- to return persistently, keep recurring
recursus -- a running back, going back, return, retreat, a returning path, way back
decursus -- a running down, downward course, descent, A descent, attack, An evolution, man&oelig;uvre, A running in armor, a course, career, after every grade of office
excursus -- a running out, running forth, excursion, A sally, charge, inroad, invasion
excurso -- to break forth repeatedly, to make frequent sallies, incursions*
accursus -- a running to, coming to:
__duct
to lead, draw, conduct, To take home, accompany % a leading, conducting, lineaments.&mdash; Military lead, conduct, generalship, command
circumductum -- période (t. de rhét.).
interductus -- interpunctuation
conducti -- [poét.] / [opposé à locare] se charger d'une construction (d'une entreprise) contre rémunération, prendre à ferme, prendre en adjudication / int., contribuer utilement à qqch, être utile, être avantageux*
conductum -- something hired, the subject of a lease, a hired apartment*
perducto -- to lead, conduct
deducta -- somme abandonnée par l'héritier.*
obducto -- to lead, conduct in opposition, rivalry to another
__frem
to roar, resound, growl, murmur, rage, snort, howl, whiz, resound, neighs, mutter, applauded, To murmur at, grumble because of, complain loudly of, To demand angrily, cry threateningly
circumfremo -- to make a noise around something
confremo -- to resound, murmur loudly:
perfremo -- to roar about, snort along
adfremo -- to roar, rage, growl, murmur at
defremo -- to ceaseraging, roaring, to abate
infremo -- to make a noise, growl, bellow
__gest
to bear, carry, have, wear, wield, to air himself, to be dearly loved, to cherish, To carry, furnish, present % to gesticulate, express strong feeling, leap, be transported, exult, be joyful, be delighted, To desire eagerly, wish passionately, be eager, thirst, long % bearing, carriage, posture, attitude, motion, gesture, movement, action, sign, gesture, action % deeds, acts, achievements
circumgesto -- to carry around:
praegesta -- ce qui a été fait auparavant.
praegestio -- to desire greatly, delight
antegestum -- fait antérieur, précédent
suggestum -- an artificial mound, platform, stage, tribune2
suggestus -- a raised place, artificial height, platform, stage, tribune2
congesto -- to bring, carry together
progesto -- to carry before
adgestus -- piling up; act of bringing; earthen bank, terrace; sprinkling earth over body;2
adgestum -- an elevation formed like a dike, mound2
digesta -- a name given to a collection of writings distributed under certain heads, the Pandects, Digests;, the Bible, Sing.3
regesta -- subst., a list, catalogue, register3
regestum -- earth thrown up2
ingesto -- to bear
__moen
defensive walls, ramparts, bulwarks, city walls, fortifications, Walls, enclosure, A city enclosed by walls, walled town, city, all the towns, A mansion, palace % anc. sing. de moenia % for munio
circummoenio -- to wall up around, to fortify, secure, Absol.
antemoenio -- to furnish with a front, protecting wall, to provide with a rampart
praemoenio -- to fortify, defend in front
commoenio -- c. communĭo, īre.#
admoenio -- to draw near the walls, to besiege, invest, admovi
__puls
to push against, strike upon, beat, hammer, keep hitting, batter, knock, stamp upon, tread the ice, shatter, play upon, reaches, To drive forth, impel, to actuate, agitate, disturb, disquiet, throbbing
circumpulso -- to strike, beat around;
propulso -- to drive back, ward off, repel, repulse, to ward off, avert, repel, will put out of the question
compulso -- 1 - tr. - pousser fort, pousser violemment. 2 - intr. - se heurter contre, se heurter à.
repulsa -- a rejection, denial, refusal, repulse, because of rejections, a refusal, denial, repulse, defeat, failed of his election
repulso -- to drive back, beat back again, to repel again and again.
adpulsus -- bringing/driving to (cattle) (/right to); landing; approach; influence, impact;
impulsus -- a striking against, push, pressure, shock, impulse, incitement, instigation, influence
impulso -- pousser contre
depulso -- to thrust away, push aside
depulsum -- cérémonies pour conjurer un malheur.#
expulso -- to drive out, to expel, driven out of its seat, overcome, subdued
__stup
to be struck senseless, be stunned, be benumbed, be aghast, be astounded, be amazed, be stupefied, are lost in wonder at, To be benumbed, be stiffened, be silenced, hesitate, stop % D % to grow astonished, become amazed
circumstupeo -- to look around with amazement, to stand amazed
praestupesco -- to be greatly astonished
constupesco -- - intr. - Gloss. être très étonné, être interdit.
constupeo -- to be very much astonished
obstupesco -- to become senseless, be stupefied, be astounded, be struck dumb
obstupeo -- - 1 - intr. - fig. être frappé de stupeur, rester interdit. - 2 - tr. - frapper de stupeur.
200
adstupeo -- to be stunned/astounded/astonished/amazed (at); to be enthralled (by) (w/DAT);
instupeo -- to be torpid, numb;, part. pres.
__text
that which is woven, a web, A plait, texture, fabric, structure
circumtextum -- a garment inwoven with purple
praetexta -- see 1 praetextus#
praetextum -- a pretence, excuse#
contextus -- connection, coherence, The context, sequel
__tinn
to clink, jingle, pay down
circumtinnio -- to ring, tinkle around
subtinnio -- to sound a little, to tinkle, med.
obtinnio -- to tingle
retinnio -- to ring again, resound
__toll
to lift, take up, raise, elevate, exalt, to take up, accept, acknowledge, bring up, rear, educate, was the father of, ancoras, to lift the anchor, weigh anchor, set sail, signa, to take up the march, break up camp, march, To build, raise, erect, To take on board, take up, carry, had on board, to raise, lift, lift up, elevate, set up, start, look up.&mdash;To lift, cheer, encourage, your spirits are raised, have taken courage, console, To exalt, extol, To assume, bear, endure, To take up, take away, remove, carry off, make way with, To take off, carry off, make away with, kill, destroy, ruin, lay waste.&mdash;To do away with, remove, abolish, annul, abrogate, cancel, away with them!, to deny the existence of, to consume in speechmaking % Veg. gonflement au cou, gonflement des amygdales.
circumtollo -- to remove on every side
supertollo -- to raise above
abstollo -- - tr. - enlever.
contollo -- to bring together, will go to meet him
protollo -- To stretch forth, out, to bring forth
extollo -- to lift out, lift up, raise, elevate
adtollo -- to raise/lift up/towards/to a higher position; to erect, build; to exalt; to extol, exalt;
intollo -- to raise
retollo -- to take away again
__trem
to shake, quake, quiver, tremble, quiver, to quake before, tremble at, shudder at % to begin to shake, tremble, to shake, quake, tremble for fear; to quake, tremble at
circumtremo -- c. circum tremo.
praetremo -- tr., redouter
contremesco -- to tremble all over; to shake (violently), quake; to tremble at/with fear, be afraid of;
contremisco -- to tremble, shake, shudder
contremo -- to tremble, quake
pertremisco -- to tremble greatly at, to be in great fear of, acc.
pertremo -- - tr. - Fest. redouter.
intremisco -- to begin to tremble or quake
intremo -- to tremble, shake within, quake to the centre
attremo -- to tremble at a thing
extremum -- an end, the end#
__uers
to turn often, keep turning, handle, whirl about, turn over, shake, break up, make hay, wheel about, pasture, peruse, kept displaying hesitation, I have wasted time enough with this man, to move about, dwell, live, remain, stay, abide, be, to turn, twist, bend, manage, direct, to pervert, changes, To upturn, discompose, disturb, vex, agitate, to be disturbed, subvert, treated each in turn, To turn over, think over, reflect upon, revolve, consider, meditate, to be, be circumstanced, be situated, waged with many vicissitudes, To occupy oneself, be engaged, be busied, be employed, having fulfilled his mission honorably, To be concerned, belong, depend, turn % to dwell, live, remain, stay, abide, be in a place or among certain persons % a line, row, a line, verse
circumuersor -- - intr. - tourner autour.
circumuerso -- to turn around, pass.
transuerso -- tr., remuer en travers
transuersum -- a cross direction, position2
interuersor -- to turn hither and thither
conuerso -- to turn around
conuersor -- to abide, frequent#
peruerso -- tr., renverser entièrement
peruersum -- a wrong, evil*
subuerso -- to overturn, overthrow, ruin
aduersor -- to resist, withstand, oppose, able to resist, quo minus2
aduersa -- subst., a female opponent, adversary2
aduerso -- verb. freq., to turn to
obuersor -- to make an appearance, show oneself*
obuerso -- to take position opposite, over against, to oppose one's self2
inuerso -- fréq. de inverto.
inuersor -- to be among, to be occupied about#
reuerso -- to turn round, Pass., turned back
diuersium -- 
auersor -- to turn from, turn away, shrink from, To repulse, scorn, decline, shun, avoid
auersum -- the hinder, back part, the back
auerso -- v. aversor??
euerso -- fréq. de everto??
__uest
to cover with a garment, provide with clothing, dress, clothe, vest, to clothe, cover, robe, To clothe, cover, deck, array, attire, surround, adorn, covered with verdure, beard, to clothe, dress, surround, adorn
circumuestio -- to clothe, cover over.
superuestio -- to clothe upon, clothe
conuestio -- to clothe, cover, envelop
subuestio -- to clothe from beneath, clothe by degrees
deuestio -- to undress (w/ABL); to change/take off clothes; to strip (off);
inuestio -- to clothe, cover
reuestio -- to clothe again
__uort=uert
to turn, turn up, turn back, direct, emptied, is situated, directs his attack, to turn, turn back, to be turned, be directed, face, look, To turn about, be engaged, move, be, be situated, To turn back, turn about, reverse, wheeled about, fled, put to flight, To turn over, turn up, revolves, To turn, ply, drive, to turn, direct, convert, appropriate, are driven, making a matter of religious scruple, inclined towards, prosper, To ascribe, refer, impute as a fault.&mdash;Pass., to turn, depend, rest, hang, the question was discussed, To turn, change, alter, transform, convert, metamorphose, had dissipated, solum, to change abode, leave the country, to turn, translate, interpret, To turn, overturn, overthrow, subvert, destroy, To turn, change, be changed, To turn, be directed, turn out, result, turn out badly, the returning year, space of a year, full year, the great cycle of the stars
circumuorto -- to turn around, turns, is turned around on its axis, turning one's self to the right side
/interuerto -- to turn aside, divert, intercept, embezzle, squander
transuorto -- - tr. - 1 - changer en, transformer. - 2 - Tert. détourner, écarter. - 3 - Vulg. bouleverser.
praeuorto -- to anticipate; to preoccupy, attend to first; to outstrip, outrun;
praeuortor -- I. To prefer II. To go before, precede, outstrip, outrun
anteuorto -- - tr. et intr. - arch. : c. anteverto.
/subuerto -- to turn upside down, upset, overturn, overthrow
conuorto -- Act., to turn, whirl round, to wheel about, to cause to turn, to turn back, reverse;, to turn, direct somewhere, to direct to, towards, to move, turn to
peruorto -- to turn around, about, to overturn, overthrow, throw down
prouorto -- to turn forwards, turned forwards, straightforwards
diuortium -- a parting, point of separation, fork, a water-shed, A divorce, dissolution of marriage, a division, difference
diuorto -- to separate; to divert, turn away/in; to digress; to oppose; to divorce/leave marriage;
/obuerto -- to turn towards, turn against, direct towards
/reuertor -- to turn back, turn about, come back, return
aduorto -- to turn a thing to, toward a place
deuortium -- a by-way
deuorto -- I. Act., To turn away, turn aside any thing II. Neutr., to turn or go aside from any place or any direction; to turn or go towards; to turn in, put up, lodge anywhere
auorto -- to turn, away from a place, to avert, turn off, remove
euorto -- to overturn, turn upside down
__prehens#
ow
comprehenso -- to embrace
deprehensa -- Fest. peine disciplinaire.
reprehenso -- to check continually
__pugnant
contradictions, inconsistencies, things irreconcilable
compugnantia -- a fighting together
oppugnantia -- resistance, opposition
repugnantia -- a contradiction, contrariety, incompatibility, repugnance
__gress=gred
a stepping, going, step, course, way, slowly, steer
intergressus -- abl. sing., a coming between, intervention
retrogressus -- a retrograde movement, retrogression
praegressus -- an advance, steps in development
congressus -- a meeting, assembly, conference, conversation, interview, A joining battle, onset, encounter, fight
ingressus -- an advancing, walking, gait, could not stir, begins, A going in, entering, inroads
ingressum -- entrée.
regressus -- a going back, return, regress, A retreat, a return, retreat, regress
adgressus -- part. de adgredior.@
egressus -- part. passé de egredior.@
__punct
estocade % a prick, puncture, A point, mathematical point, an affirmative vote, vote, suffrage, ballot, has everybody's approval, a point, temporis, the smallest portion of time, an instant, moment, point of time, at the same instant, a brief clause, short section
interpunctum -- a separating of words by points, interpunctuation
__saep
fold, paddock; enclosure; voting enclosure in the Campus Martius % a fence, enclosure, wall, stakes.&mdash;An enclosed place, enclosure, fold, An enclosure for voting, the polls, booths
intersaeptum -- the midriff, diaphragm#
consaepto -- to fence round, hedge in, enclose
consaeptum -- a fence, hedge
dissaeptum -- a barrier, partition
prosaeptum -- v. proseptum.
300
__ostend
to stretch out, spread before, expose to view, show, point out, exhibit, display, appear, display, show themselves, make heard, expose, are brought to light, to show, hold out, disclose, exhibit, manifest, now promise, now threaten, furnish ideas, is paraded as.&mdash;To show, express, indicate, declare, say, tell, make known, as we showed above, demonstrate
praeostendo -- to show beforehand, display before, make clear, Absol.
subostendo -- to point out secretly, to show indirectly, med.
__script
to write often % something drawn, a space enclosed by lines, upon a draught-board divided into twelve sections.&mdash;A written composition, writing, treatise, book, work, without notes, read from a manuscript, in a speech written by me, writings, A written text, literal meaning, letter, against the letter of the law
praescripto -- tr., prescrire [habituellement]
praescriptum -- a previous direction, precept, limitation, proviso, regulation, within bounds
inscriptum -- inscription, titre.
rescriptum -- an imperial rescript
descripta -- things recorded, writings
__fer
a wild beast, wild animal, the sea-monster, wild birds % days of rest, holidays, festivals, Peace, leisure % to strike, smite, beat, knock, cut, thrust, hit, butts, batter, beat the brow, be provoked, hit, touch, To kill by striking, give a death-blow, slay, kill, behead, cut you dead, To slaughter, offer, sacrifice, foedus, to make a compact, covenant, enter into a treaty, form illicit connections, to strike, reach, affect, impress, coin, make a hit.&mdash;To cozen, cheat, gull, trick % to bear, carry, support, lift, hold, take up, able to carry, to be pregnant, to hold dear.&mdash;To carry, take, fetch, move, bear, lead, conduct, drive, direct, raisest, put in motion, march, come, stir, pursue, drove, when it should blow, led, coals to Newcastle, se, to move, betake oneself, hasten, rush, meet, fled, springs, are driven, flows, to carry off, take by force, snatch, plunder, spoil, ravage, To bear, produce, yield, To offer, bring, To get, receive, acquire, obtain, earn, win, to bear, carry, hold, support, are old, attain, be called, bearing an assumed character, support, act as a foil, To bring, take, carry, render, lead, conduct, bring help, proffer, procure, praise, magnify, To prompt, impel, urge, carry away, be carried away, inclination leads, impels, To carry off, take away, remove, se, to carry, conduct, boasting, paraded, To bear, bring forth, produce, To bear away, win, carry off, get, obtain, receive, get the votes, experience, escape, To bear, support, meet, experience, take, put up with, suffer, tolerate, endure, brook, did not let it pass, without, control himself, to bear, experience, disclose, show, exhibit, to manifest, profess, show, display, declare, to report, relate, make known, assert, celebrate, say, tell, say, is called, as they said, as is reported, were accounted, will regard, they call, were current, to cast, give in, record, passing judgment, to bring forward, move, propose, promote, proposed a bill, to offer, propose as judge, propose a judge to, go to law with, to enter, set down, note, set down as paid.&mdash;To require, demand, render necessary, allow, permit, suffer, as is usual at that time of life, if such be your pleasure % to be boiling hot, boil, ferment, glow, steam, To be in a ferment, swarm, throng, surge, is hotly pressed, to burn, glow, be heated, be inflamed, be agitated, rage, rave, shines % wild beast/animal; wild/untamed horse/boar % c. feriae. % to rest from work, to keep holiday % to boil, be hot, glow, rage, blaze, To swarm, be thronged, be in a ferment % wild machen
praeterfero -- to carry by; only
praeterferor -- se porter au-delà de [av. acc.].
circumfero -- to bear round, carry around:
transfero -- to bear across, bring through, carry over, convey over, transport, transfer
introfero -- to carry in, bring in
superfero -- To carry over, beyond, to place, put over, Pass., to go, ride, fly, swim, over
antefero -- to bear in front, carry before:
postfero -- to put after, esteem less
praefero -- to bear before, carry in front, hold forth
confero -- to bring together, carry/convey; to collect/gather, compare; to unite, add; to direct - to discuss/debate/confer; to oppose; to pit/match against another; to blame; to bestow;
conferua -- a kind of water plant#
conferueo -- to seethe, boil together2
differo -- to carry apart, spread abroad, scatter, disperse, separate, planted, tore to pieces, to distract, disquiet, disturb, confound, To spread abroad, publish, report, circulate, make notorious, To defer, put off, postpone, adjourn, protract, delay, to adjourn court, make no rash attacks, till he should reach, says there must be no delay, to put off, get rid of, keep off, keep, to postpone her death, to differ, vary, be different
perfero -- to bear through, bring home
perferueo -- to be very hot2
profero -- to carry out, bring forth, produce
suffero -- to take up, submit to, undergo, bear, endure, suffer
subferueo -- to boil, seethe gently2
defero -- to bring away, carry off, take down, carry, take, remove
deferueo -- to boil thoroughly;, to ferment completely2
inferiae -- sacrifices in honor of the dead4
infero -- to bring in, introduce, bring to, carry in
inferi -- h4
inferueo -- to boil in, to boil, seethe2
refero -- to bear back, bring back, drive back, carry back
referio -- to strike back, in return
referueo -- to boil, bubble up; to boil over.2
effero -- to carry out, take out, bring forth, take away, remove, escape, To carry out for burial, bear to the grave, bury, paid his funeral expenses, with a seven-fold funeral, To bring forth, bear, produce, ten, fold, To lift up, elevate, raise, rose, to set forth, spread abroad, utter, publish, proclaim, express, translate literally, To carry away, transport, excite, elate, P. pass., To bury, ruin, destroy, To bring out, expose, To raise, elevate, exalt, laud, praise, extol, se, to rise, show oneself, appear, To lift up, elate, puff up, inflate, inspire, be insolent in office, To support, endure, do away with
efferasco -- to become savage, fierce3
efferueo -- (Lebaigue P. 409 et P. 410) - intr. - 1 - bouillir, bouillonner. - 2 - s'échapper en foule, sortir en foule, fourmiller de. - 3 - être emporté par une passion, être enflammé de colère.2
efferuo -- to boil up, boil over2
adfero -- to bring, fetch, carry, convey, take, deliver:
offero -- to bring before, present, offer, show, exhibit, upon this unexpected occurrence, present a false appearance, show, a religious scruple struck him, To offer, expose, bring forward, adduce, adduced.&mdash;To offer, proffer, bring, cause, occasion, confer, bestow, thrust upon, inflict, procure
__fug
a fleeing, flight, running away, put to flight, caused a panic, drove, take flight, be checked, after his flight, Expatriation, exile, banishment, A flying, swift course, rapid motion, speed, a swift voyage, a swift passage, flee away, flight, A place of banishment, refuge, A means of removal, remedy, a fleeing, avoiding, avoidance, shunning, escape, honorable way of escape % to flee, fly, take flight, run away, make off, am off, run away, beyond shelter, too far, To become a fugitive, leave the country, go into exile, To pass quickly, speed, hasten, flee away, To vanish, disappear, pass away, perish, To flee from, avoid, shun, To flee from, avoid, get away from, escape, spared, to flee, avoid, shun, to avoid, omit, forbear, beware, To escape, get away from, elude, forsake, To escape, escape the notice of, be unobserved by, be unknown to, I forgot % to cause to flee, put to flight, drive off, chase away, rout, discomfit, banished, exiled % c. fuga.
praeterfugio -- to hasten by, pass over hastily
subterfugio -- to escape, evade, avoid, shun
subterfugium -- a subterfuge
transfugio -- to flee to the other side, go over to the enemy, desert
transfugium -- a going over to the enemy, desertion
interfugio -- to flee between, into;
superfugio -- to flee away over
praefugio -- to flee before, med.
confugio -- to flee, take refuge, run for succor:
confugium -- a place of refuge, refuge, shelter
diffugio -- to fly apart, flee in different directions, disperse, scatter, disappear
diffugium -- a dispersion. &mdash;Plur.
diffugo -- to put to flight, scatter
perfugio -- to flee for refuge
perfugium -- a resort for safety, shelter, asylum, refuge, Campania
profugio -- to flee, run away, escape
suffugio -- to flee for refuge, seek shelter
suffugium -- a refuge, shelter, covert
effugio -- to flee away, get away, escape, to flee from, escape, avoid, shun, barely, the evil to come, To escape the notice of, be disregarded by
effugium -- a fleeing, flight, escape, avoidance, way of escape, means of flight, by means of
effugia -- victime échappée des autels.
effugo -- to put to flight, no.
refugio -- to flee back, flee for safety, run from, run away, flee, escape, take refuge, avoid, shun
refugisco -- tr., fuir [fig.]
refugium -- a recourse, place of refuge, refuge
refugo -- tr., mettre de nouveau en fuite
defugio -- to run off, flee away, make an escape
defugo -- to drive away, remove
__uol
to cause to revolve, roll, turn about, turn round, to be unrolled, following up the windings, rolls in the dust, To roll up, roll together, form by rolling, forming a circle, to turn round, move in curves, revolve, roll down, flow, to roll, roll along, bring on, bring around, swift in bringing by her revolutions, determine, determines the changes of events, with revolving years, to ponder, meditate, dwell upon, think over, reflect on, consider, cherishes, to roll off, utter fluently, be rounded off.&mdash;To unroll, undergo, experience in succession % to will, wish, want, purpose, be minded, determine, I won't I will, I will I won't again, who is not free to wish?, that very ambition, wanting includes wishing, would take for, which is meant to be in demand, to dedicate some book, I have decided to mark no one, which should be pardoned, shows why you wished it to be done, if you wish me to live, that there should be a king, I wish to be pardoned, I never had any wish in my life, he wanted Spain, I want the money, acknowledge neither, we aspired to certain things, if I wished for more, person, to call for, demand, want, wish, desire, I want a few words with you, she whom I love, to want her for a wife, person, thing, to want . . . of, require . . . from, person, wants a guard for his old age, she wished her son every misfortune, bene or male, I heartily wish you well, my enemies, causā, person, to be interested in, be concerned for, be well disposed to, heartily wish him all success, our friends, please salute him, I beg your pardon, I wish it had been true, I wish I could, I wish I could have seen, I wish I had asked him, I wish you could be present, I wish you had invited, would I had been born a man, I would like to have, quam, however, however much, however powerful she may be, never so wicked, if you please, if you will, if you will.&mdash;To intend, purpose, mean, design, be minded, be about, it was their purpose, if you had offered to grant the same thing during low prices, let me come to my point, as I intended, meant to be understood by all.&mdash;To try, endeavor, attempt, aim, do you dare attempt?, meant to answer, not to provoke, did I mean to say, that he meant, was about, To resolve, conclude, determine, require, concluded to follow your advice, if you resolve, To be willing, be ready, consent, like, acquiesce, that he liked philosophizing, that you consent, refuses, to permit the tribunitian power to be useful to the republic, To do voluntarily, act intentionally, if he accused of his own free will, on purpose, To be of opinion, imagine, consider, think, mean, pretend, claim, hold, assert, assume, in which you imagine you have some influence, pretends to be, as you say he is, what I claimed to be beyond the orator's province, are of one opinion, begged the question, quid, to mean, signify, intend to say, mean to express, what do you mean by all this?, what is the meaning of the phrase, will, shall, will you prefer, if I should acknowledge, chooses to say, noli or nolite, do not resolve, to determine, resolvē, decree, demand, require, enact, gives his orders, established the custom of celebrating, made a law, that, should be, destroyed, I require you to answer, To choose rather, prefer % a wrapper, covering, integument. % the hollow of the hand, the palm, of the foot, the sole, not the slightest trace
praeteruolo -- to fly by, pass in flight
circumuoluo -- to roll around, revolve through:2
circumuolo -- to fly around:
subteruolo -- to fly beneath
subteruoluo -- - tr. - faire rouler en dessous.2
interuolo -- to fly between, among
superuolo -- to fly over
superuoluo -- to roll over2
transuolo -- to fly over, fly across, pass quickly over
transuoluo -- to roll past, by, to unroll2
anteuolo -- to fly before;
praeuolo -- ht??
conuolo -- to fly together, come hastily together, run together
conuoluo -- to roll together, roll up, roll round2
prouoluo -- to roll forward, roll along, roll over, overturn2
prouolo -- to fly forth, hurry forth, rush out
peruolo -- to fly through, flit about
peruoluo -- to roll over, tumble about2
subuolo -- to fly up, fly upwards
subuoluo -- to roll up, roll along2
aduolo -- to fly to, fly towards:
aduoluo -- to roll to, roll towards, bring by rolling:2
deuolo -- to fly down
deuoluo -- to roll down2
obuoluo -- to wrap round, envelop, muffle up, cover over, enfold2
reuoluo -- to roll back, unroll, unwind, revolve, return2
reuolo -- to fly back
diuoluo -- to roll to and fro., to ponder2
auolo -- to fly away:
euolo -- to fly out, fly away, fly up
euoluo -- to roll out, roll. forth, unroll, unfold
__inter
c. intro, are
superintero -- - tr. - Th.-Prisc. frotter sur.??
400
exintero -- to disembowel, draw
__scand
to rise, climb, mount, clamber, get up, ascend, in triumph
superscando -- to climb over, stride over
suprascando -- to climb over, surmount, pass
__uors
to turn, wind, twist, whirl about often, violently % to be tarrying, to lodge anywhere as a guest % A furrow
circumuorso -- to turn around, pass.
subuorso -- to overturn, overthrow, ruin
aduorso -- verb. freq., to turn to
aduorsor -- to stand opposite to one, to be against, to resist, oppose, resistere, obsistere.*
deuorsor -- ⍀??
__composit
an agreement, compact
decomposita -- verbes dérivés (de verbes composés).
__nucul
nucleus, inside of a nut, kernel; nut; central part; hard round mass/nodule;
internuculus -- one who gives himself up to prostitution#
__terr
to terrify, frighten, subdue by terror
per.con.terreo -- tr., frapper de terreur
__lict=linq
a fault, offence, trespass, crime, transgression, wrong, defect
postdelictum -- délit postérieur, récidive
__iaci
to lie, be recumbent, be prostrate, lie at rest, To lie i&lt;*&gt;, be ill, To lie dead, have fallen, To lie long, linger, tarry, stop, To lie, be situate, To lie low, be flat, be level, was stilled, To lie in ruins, be broken down, To hang loose, loose on the neck, to rest, be inactive, be in retirement, To be cast down, be dejected, To lie prostrate, be powerless, To fall, be refuted, be disproved, fail, To lie dormant, be disused, be neglected, be of no avail, To be low, be despised, be in no esteem, were low, To lie idle, be neglected, is not posted % to throw, cast, fling, hurl, To throw up, lay, set, establish, build, found, construct, erect, To send forth, emit, produce, To throw away, To throw, scatter, sow, to throw, throw up, cast, bring as an accusation, To lay, set, establish, to prepare for, found.&mdash;To throw out, let fall, intimate, utter, mention, declare, express oneself % a wooden hay-rack
/circumiaceo -- to lie around, border upon:
circumiacio -- To cast, throw, place around, pass.
/subteriaceo -- to lie under
subteriacio -- to throw under
interiacio -- to put/throw between; to interpose; to insert; to introduce;
/interiaceo -- to lie between
superiacio -- to cast over, throw upon
/superiaceo -- to lie over, upon
supraiacio -- - tr. - Col. jeter dessus.
transiacio -- 
/praeiaceo -- to lie before, be situated in front of
praeiacio -- to cast, throw up in front
/subiaceo -- to lie underneath/below/at the foot/edge of/exposed (to); to come under heading of;
/coniaceo -- to lie together
/adiaceo -- to lie at, lie near, adjoin, border upon, touch, bound:
/obiaceo -- to lie before, over against
__iace
circumiaceo -- to lie around, border upon:
subteriaceo -- to lie under
/subteriacio -- to throw under
/interiacio -- to put/throw between; to interpose; to insert; to introduce;
interiaceo -- to lie between;
/superiacio -- to cast over, throw upon
superiaceo -- to lie over, upon
/supraiacio -- - tr. - Col. jeter dessus.
/transiacio -- 
praeiaceo -- to lie before, be situated in front of
/praeiacio -- to cast, throw up in front
subiaceo -- to lie underneath/below/at the foot/edge of/exposed (to); to come under heading of;
coniaceo -- to lie together
adiaceo -- to lie at, lie near, adjoin, border upon, touch, bound:
obiaceo -- to lie before, over against
__sed
to sit, remain sitting, who will keep his place, to sit, occupy an official seat, preside, be a judge, hold court, act as juror, assist, To continue sitting, sit still, continue, remain, tarry, wait, abide, sit idle, be inactive, delay, linger, loiter, stayed at home, waits, sit with folded hands, to sit down, remain encamped, be entrenched, keep the field, by inactivity, to sink, settle, subside, rest, lie, was thicker on the plain, sat well upon your stomach, To sit, sit close, hold fast, be firm, be fixed, be settled, be established, stuck fast, stuck fast, from sinking deeply, to be fixed, be impressed, be determined % to bring to rest, lay, To settle, still, calm, allay, assuage, appease, quiet, check, end, stop, stay, subsided, slake, relieve, refresh, was quieted, come into port % houseleek
circumsedeo -- to sit around, surround, besiege, blockade, invest, encompass, beset:
supersedeo -- to sit upon; hence, fig., to be superior to, forbear, refrain, desist, leave off, pass, omit
suprasedeo -- daraufsitzen
persedeo -- to remain sitting, sit continuously
consedeo -- - intr. - 1 - être assis avec. - 2 - être assis ensemble.
consedo -- to still, allay, quiet
reseda -- a plant#
resedo -- to assuage, heal, dat.
__prosed
proseda -- a common prostitute
prosedeo -- - intr. - se tenir exposé au public.
__essed
essedum -- a two-wheeled war-chariot, car
esseda -- a two-wheeled war-chariot
__sid
to sit down, sink, settle, alight, To sit fast, remain sitting, be fixed, grounded
circumsido -- to besiege:
circumsideo -- to sit around a person or thing, to surround.
supersido -- - intr. - Amm. s'asseoir sur.
praesideo -- to guard, watch, protect, defend, To preside over, manage, superintend, direct, command
praesidium -- defence, protection, guardianship, help, aid, assistance, A guard, escort, convoy, garrison, garrison, with troops, escort, garrison, troops, picket guards, An occupied place, post, station, intrenchment, fortification, camp, on guard, leaves his post, with the army.&mdash;Aid, help, assistance, what was needful for his support and safety, encouragement
praesidior -- to watch, guard
consido -- to sit down, take seats, be seated, settle
consideo -- c. consedeo.
dissideo -- to sit apart, be remote, to be at variance, disagree, differ, is distracted, to be unlike, be dissimilar, differ, disagree, sits awry
dissidium -- dissentiment, discorde, division.*
dissido -- - intr. - Sil. camper séparément.
subsidium -- the troops in reserve, line of reserve, third line of battle, triarii, A body of reserve, auxiliary corps, auxiliary forces, stationed as a reserve, Aid, help, relief, succor, assistance, reinforcement, Support, assistance, aid, help, protection, make provision, A place of refuge, asylum, retreat*
subsidior -- to act as a reserve, stand in reserve*
subsido -- to sit down, crouch down, squat, settle down, sink down
subsideo -- ??
persideo -- trict??
persido -- to sink down, penetrate
desido -- to sink, settle down, fall
desidia -- a sitting idle, idleness, inactivity, sloth
desideo -- to sit long, sit idle, remain inactive
desidies -- no., idleness
insideo -- to sit upon, settle on, to take place, settle, be fixed, adhere, To take possession of, occupy, inhabit
insidiae -- a snare, trap, an ambush, ambuscade, for a secret attack, artifice, crafty device, plot, snare, per or ex, by artifice, by stratagem, craftily, insidiously*
insido -- to sit in, settle on
insidio -- c. insidior, āri.
insidior -- to lie in ambush, lie in wait for, to watch for, plot against, seize stealthily*
insidia -- c. insidiae.?
obsideo -- to sit, stay, remain, abide, To beset, haunt, frequent, to hem in, beset, besiege, invest, blockade, hampered in every way, Supin. acc., choked, To occupy, fill, possess, is filled, surrounded, take up, besieged, To watch closely, look out for
obsidior -- to lie in wait for, to waylay
obsidium -- a siege, blockade / the condition of a hostage, hostageship*
obsido -- to beset, invest, besiege, blockade
resideo -- to sit back, remain sitting, remain behind, be left, stay, remain, rest, linger, tarry, abide, reside, resting, to remain behind, remain, be left, stay
resido -- to sit down, settle
residuum -- reste, restant [pr. et fig.]
residuae -- arrears, dues, slothfui, inactive;
adsideo -- to sit by, sit near, attend, is to be classed with, To sit with, To settle, remain, To invest, lay siege to
adsido -- to take a seat, sit down, resume one's seat:
__sil
to be noiseless, be still, be silent, keep silence, not speak of, keep silent about, suppress, To be still, keep quiet, remain inactive, rest, cease % wood, forest (sylvan); % a kind of parsley, smallage % to become still, fall silent, grow calm
circumsilio -- to leap around, dance around
supersilio -- tr., bondir par-dessus / intr., se percher sur
transsilio -- to leap, jump, spring across, to leap over, spring over
consilium -- a council, body of counsellors, deliberative assembly, a court of justice, a council of war, without advisers, counsellor, Deliberation, consultation, considering together, counsel, a question for discussion, for him to decide, for you to consider, admitted to the counsels, A conclusion, determination, resolution, measure, plan, purpose, intention, design, policy, former policy, resolve promptly, in purpose, change her policy, resource, their object being, with one accord, pursued his own course, by the state, by legal process, on their own account, capere or suscipere, to form a purpose, plan, resolve, decide, determine, inire, to form a plan, resolve, conspire, determine, est, it is intended, I purpose, I don't mean to, who had formed the plan, a plan, device, stratagem, Counsel, advice, take your advice, Understanding, judgment, wisdom, sense, penetration, prudence, discretion, indiscreet
consilior -- to take counsel, consult, considering, To counsel, advise
prosilio -- to leap forward, spring forth, spring up, to spring forth, burst forth, start out, to break forth, To rush, hasten, undertake eagerly
dissilio -- to leap asunder, fly apart, burst, break up, split, to be broken, be dissolved
persilio -- to leap through
subsilio -- to leap up
desilio -- to leap down, dismount, to dismount, jump overboard, dismounted, to leap headlong, venture heedlessly
exsilium -- banishment, exile, for exile, A place of exile, retreat, exiles
exsilio -- to spring out, spring forth, leap up, start up, bound, started out
exsilior -- être banni, vivre en exil*
assilio -- jump/leap (up/on/towards), rush/dash (at/against), assault; mount (male-
insilia -- the treadle#
insilio -- to leap in, spring up, throw oneself upon, bound, mount
resilio -- to leap back, spring back
asilus -- a gad-fly, horse-fly, V.#
__sile
intersileo -- to be silent in the meanwhile
intersilesco -- - intr. - rester sans voix.
consilesco -- to become still, to be hushed, keep silent, grow dumb
__son
to make a noise, sound, resound, echo, To speak, sound, utter, express, speak, bespeak a human being, betrayed, To cry out, call, celebrate, sing, cause to resound, praise, cries out, vaunting, To mean, express, signify, agree in meaning, means % a noise, sound, the highest treble . . . the lowest bass, utter emply sounds, tone, character, style % a belt, girdle, zone
circumsono -- to sound, resound on every side:
intersono -- to sound among
500
praesono -- to sound before
consono -- to sound together, sound aloud, re-echo, ring, resound
consona -- a consonant*
persona -- a mask, false face, no man disguised, An assumed character, part, affectation, A part, character, A person, personage, character, second chief personage, the character you have to describe#
persono -- to sound through and through, resound, fill with sound, re&euml;cho
dissono -- to disagree in, sound, to be dissonant
subsono -- to express secretly, to hint, intimate*
insono -- to make a loud noise; to sound; to resound;
resono -- to sound again, resound, ring, re-echo
adsono -- to resound, respond:
exsono -- to resound
__obson
obsonium -- a relish, sauce, side-dish (with bread; usu. fish)*
obsono -- to buy provisions, cater, purvey
obsonor -- to buy provisions, to cater, purvey
__uen=ueni
a blood-vessel, vein % indulgence, kindness, grace, favor, do me this favor, this last kindness, indulgence for that day, kindly, with favor, without prejudice, by your leave, with your permission, without offence, respectfully, Permission, Forbearance, forgiveness, pardon, remission % to come, home, for the Etruscans, reaches you, falls, the parties meet at Lilybaeum, it has devolved upon me, that they would be attacked, on arriving there, to come, appeared, to strike at, for the coming year, the future, when I thought of, in, ad, to come into, fall into, enter, to have obtained the alliance of, had fallen into contempt, surrender at discretion, has talked with, happened to say, to indulge a confident hope, almost reached the point, to such a point that, will accept, to attain, ad, to come to, reach, turn to, To come, spring, arise, be produced, grow, descend, grow, To come, result, occur, happen % to hunt, chase % that which is sold, that which is for sale, sale % c. venor, āri.
circumuenio -- to come around, be around, encircle, encompass, surround:
contrauenio -- to oppose, dat.*
interuenio -- to come between, come upon, come in, intervene, interrupt
interuenia -- die Zwischenräume - die Klüfte, Querspalten#
superuenio -- to come in addition, come up, arrive, supervene, follow
introuenio -- to come in
transuena -- one who comes over, a newcomer, stranger, foreigner*
transuenio -- to come
anteuenio -- to come before, get the start of, anticipate:
praeuenio -- to come before, precede, get the start of, outstrip, anticipate, prevent
postuenio -- hinten nachkommen
peruenio -- to come up, arrive
prouenio -- to come forth, appear, arise, be produced
subuenio -- to come to help, aid, assist, reinforce, relieve, succor
aduena -- a stranger, foreigner, immigrant, unskilled in our own department. &mdash; Strange, foreign, alien, migratory, of a stranger*
aduenio -- to come to, reach, arrive at:
deuenio -- to come, arrive, reach
obuenio -- to come up to, go to meet
reuenio -- to come back, return;
auena -- wild oats, V.:#
aueno -- füttern#
euenio -- to come out, come forth
__uen
interuenium -- the space between the veins
__uenor
peruenor -- to hunt through;, to run through, about
__misc
to mix, mingle, intermingle, blend
intermisceo -- to mix among, intermix, mingle
supermisceo -- mélanger en sus.
permisceo -- to mix together, mix thoroughly, commingle, intermingle
commisceo -- to mix, mingle together, intermingle:
promisceo -- - tr. - mêler avant, mélanger avant.
admisceo -- to add so as to form a mixture, mix with, admix:
immisceo -- to mix in, intermix, intermingle, blend
remisceo -- to mingle again, mix up, intermingle
__pell
to beat, strike, knock, push, drive, hurl, impel, propel, To drive out, drive away, thrust out, expel, banish, repel, drive back, discomfit, rout, banished, shamefully wounded in flight, To rout, put to flight, discomfit, To strike, set in motion, impel, struck, played, to strike, touch, move, affect, impress, To drive out, drive away, banish, expel, what has become of your love for me? % to wash off, to wash bathe, lave, Pass., to wash one's self, to bathe
interpello -- to interrupt, break in upon, To urge as an objection, To disturb, hinder, obstruct, molest, To hinder, prevent, obstruct, interpose their veto*
perpello -- to drive, urge, force, compel, constrain, prevail upon
propello -- to drive forward, drive forth, drive away, drive out
compello -- ely
dispello -- to drive asunder, scatter, disperse
abspello -- - tr. - chasser, repousser, éloigner, écarter, bannir.*
expello -- to drive out, drive away, thrust out, eject, expel
repello -- to drive back, thrust back, drive away, reject, repulse, repel
depello -- to drive out, drive away, remove, expel, put out, put off, turn aside
impello -- I. To strike against, push, drive, smite, strike, reach
appello -- to drive to, move up, bring along, force towards
apello -- - tr. - Gloss. expulser.
__opell
opella -- a bit of labor, petty pains
opellum -- das Werkchen, Schriftchen
__uent
wind, talks in vain, will throw from me, hast thrown thy promise to the winds, a wind, whatever circumstances may arise, times of trouble, who is now on the high tide of prosperity, by raising a storm, popular favor % to be wont to come, to come
interuentus -- a coming in, intervention, An intervention, occurrence
superuentus -- a coming up, arrival
prouentus -- a coming forth, growth, produce, yield, an issue, result, A harvest, fortunate issue, happy result, success*
prouentum -- succès [bon ou mauvais]*
conuentus -- a meeting, assembly, throng, A congress, council, A trading company, corporation, A judicial session, court of justice, to hold a court, An agreeing, agreement, by agreement, with one accord
conuento -- to meet often
conuentum -- an agreement, compact, contract, convention, a marriage contract and settlement
subuento -- to come with assistance
aduento -- to advance, press forward, march on, approach, at her coming, as disaster drew near
aduentus -- a coming, approach, arrival, at the prospect of his coming, the approaching tramp, alleviate them
obuentus -- a meeting
reuento -- - intr. - revenir, retourner.
reuentus -- a return
euentus -- an occurrence, accident, event, fortune, fate, lot, The issue, consequence, result, end, A success, good-fortune*
euentum -- an occurrence, chance, event, That which befalls, experience, fortune, An issue, consequence, result, effect*
euenta -- pl., événements, choses accidentelles / [philos.] accident [oppos. conjuncta] / résultats, effets*
__hab
to have, hold, support, carry, wear, To have, hold, contain, To have, hold, occupy, inhabit, to have, To have, be furnished with, To have, hold, keep, retain, detain, lodged, preserve, station, gives to keep, to have, own, possess, be master of, enjoy, are extant, has my love, is rich, To have, get, receive, obtain, a place, it reaches him, To find oneself, be, feel, be situated, be off, come off, it is well, escape punishment, abides, To make, render, P. perf. pass, act., has brought in and holds, To treat, use, handle, To hold, direct, turn, keep, To hold, pronounce, deliver, utter, make, To hold, convene, conduct, cause to take place, To hold, govern, administer, manage, wield, to hold, take, occupy, to have, have in mind, entertain, cherish, experience, exhibit, be actuated by, To have, have in mind, mean, wish, be able, this was in substance what, P. fut. pass., to have, be bound, To have, have in mind, know, be acquainted with, be informed of, such are, I remember, in animo, to have in mind, purpose, intend, be inclined, To have in mind, hold, think, believe, esteem, regard, look upon, be afraid of, all alike, a matter of conscience, regard as pleasure, To have, have received, have acquired, have made, have incurred, satis, to have enough, be content, be satisfied, To have, be characterized by, exercise, practise, this is characteristic of merit, observed, this was Caesar's way, To have, involve, bring, render, occasion, produce, excite, To hold, keep, occupy, engage, busy, exercise, inspire, vexes, To take, accept, bear, endure, To keep, reserve, conceal, To keep, spend, pass, rem, to have to do, be intimate
subterhabeo -- - tr. - placer au-dessous de.*
superhabeo -- to have over, upon
antehabeo -- to prefer:*
posthabeo -- to place after, esteem less, postpone, neglect*
dehabeo -- not to have, to lack
__amb
to go round, go about, To surround, encircle, encompass, to canvass for votes, To secure by canvassing, win by solicitation, entreat, solicit, court, to be sought in marriage
circumambio -- - tr. - entourer.
exambio -- - intr. - 1 - aller çà et là. - 2 - aller à la ronde (pour solliciter), briguer, solliciter.
__col
to till, tend, care for, cultivate, To frequent, dwell in, stay in, inhabit, abide, live, dwell, and the banks of, haunts, to frequent, cherish, care for, protect, guard, watch over, To honor, revere, reverence, worship, To honor, esteem, love, adhere to, cherish, To attend to, dress, clothe, adorn, by attire, To cultivate, cherish, seek, practise, devote oneself to, follow, observe, To experience, live through, pass, spend % a distaff: % c. colon. % a leather bag, a sack for holding liquids. % a vessel for straining, colander, V.
circumcolo -- to dwell round about, dwell near:4
transcolo -- tr., passer à travers un tamis2
praecolo -- to cultivate beforehand, To embrace prematurely
concolo -- tr., honorer ensemble3
percolo -- to strain through, to filter, percolate.2
excolo -- to cultivate, improve, ennoble, refine, perfect
incolo -- to be at home, abide, dwell4
recolo -- to till again, cultivate anew, work over
accolo -- to dwell near, be a neighbor to:4
decolo -- to come to naught, to fail*
__dol=dole
to feel pain, suffer, be in pain, ache, To grieve, deplore, lament, be sorry, be afflicted, be hurt, take offence, incapable of feeling, the smart, a grievance, to qive pain, afflict, it pains, gives sorrow, one is grieved, the burned child dreads the fire % a large, wide - mouthed, globular jar, new wine % a device, artifice, contrivance, wilful wrong, fraud, malice, the crime of violence implies malice. &mdash; Guile, deceit, deception, cunning, trickery, any fault, A snare % dépon., s'affliger % Inscr. douleur, chagrin. % int., s'affliger %  % to chip with an axe, hew, To cudgel, belabor, drub, to rough-hew, hack out
circumdoleo -- to suffer, on every side
condolesco -- to feel severe pain, suffer much, be in distress, ache
condoleo -- to feel severe pain, to suffer greatly
perdoleo -- to pain deeply, grieve greatly
perdolesco -- to feel great pain, be deeply grieved
600
perdolisco -- to feel great pain, grief
dedoleo -- to cease grieving
indolesco -- to feel pain, smart, ache, be grieved, be distressed
__dol2
circumdolo -- to hew off around
perdolo -- to hew out, to fashion with hewing
dedolo -- to cut down; to hew smooth/away/to shape; to beat/cudgel badly;
edolo -- to hew out, work out, finish
__fin
to limit, bound, enclose within boundaries, To stop, close, shut, to set bounds to, restrain, check, To prescribe, determine, fix, set, appoint, assign, has no definite boundaries, To put an end to, finish, terminate, end with verbs, die.&mdash;To make an end, come to an end, cease, ceased speaking, died
circumfinio -- to complete a circle, to bring to an end
interfinium -- Isid. espace intermédiaire.
praefinio -- to determine beforehand, ordain, prescribe
confinium -- a confine, common boundary, limit, border, in questions of, a confine, boundary, dawn, twilight
confine -- that which borders upon, a boundary, border, confine, neighborhood
diffinio -- - tr. - 1 - renfermer dans des limites, borner, délimiter, circonscrire, fixer; définir, déterminer. 2 - établir, déterminer, fixer. 3 - borner, limiter, arrêter.
perfinio -- - tr. - finir, accomplir.
definio -- to bound, set bounds to, limit, terminate, define
__fod
to dig, dig up, To dig out, make by digging, excavate, mine, undermine, To prick, pierce, wound, thrust, stab, jog, to goad, sting, disturb % c. fodio.
circumfodio -- to dig around something, dig about
interfodio -- to dig out, dig between, pierce
transfodio -- to pierce through, run through, stab through, transfix, transpierce
praefodio -- to dig in front of, To bury in advance
confodio -- to stab/run through, wound fatally; to pierce, harm; to dig up/turn over (land); to trench;*
suffodio -- to dig under, sap, undermine, no indication of a mine, To pierce from below, stab underneath, bore through, stabbed in the belly
perfodio -- to dig through, pierce through, transfix
defodio -- to dig deep, dig up, make by digging
effodio -- to dig out, dig up, mine, excavate, ransacked, make by digging, will be torn out
adfodio -- to dig in addition to
infodio -- to bury, inter
refodio -- to dig up, dig out again
__gem
to sigh, groan, lament, were in mourning, in the death agony, panting, to sigh over, bemoan, bewail, lament, To moan, To groan, creak % to begin to sigh
circumgemo -- to roar around:
congemo -- to sigh deeply:
congemesco -- - intr. - Tert. s'affliger.
congemisco -- to sigh deeply
ingemisco -- to utter a groan, heave a sigh, groan over, it is deplorable
ingemo -- to groan over, sigh at, mourn over, lament, bewail, mourn, groan, wail
adgemo -- to groan, wail, lament, Et gemit
regemo -- to resound with sighs, groans
degemo -- beseufzen, über - sich beklagen
__leg
to bring together, gather, collect, to be plucked, spin out, receive the last breath, give a parting kiss, to furl, To take, carry off, steal, To go over, traverse, pass, wander through, sails through, track, wander through, To sail by, skirt, coast along, of my theme, To choose, pick out, single out, select, elect, appoint, man singles out man, pass in review, making up the roll of the senate, to read, peruse, scan, epitaphs, find written, To read out, read aloud, recite, with recitation, the news of the day
circumlego -- int., côtoyer
contralego -- int., faire une lecture de contrôle [pour permettre la vérification d'un texte de manuscrit]
interlego -- to pluck here and there
retrolego -- tr., côtoyer de nouveau ou en revenant
translego -- to bequeath
praelego -- to sail by, skirt
perlego -- to view all over, examine thoroughly, scan, survey
sublego -- to gather from below, gather up, To catch up secretly, gather by stealth, To choose as a substitute, elect instead
collega -- colleague (in official/priestly office); associate, fellow (not official);
collegium -- college/board (priests); corporation; brotherhood/guild/company/society/school;*
ablego -- to send off, send out of the way, banish, send into exile:
delego -- to assign/appoint; to delegate/entrust (to); to consign; to transfer/pass; to refer/attribute;
adlego -- to select, choose, elect:
elego -- to convey away, by bequest, to bequeath away
__eleg
elegi -- elegiac verses, elegy
elegia -- elegy
__met
a cone, pyramid % to measure, mete, have in great abundance, measure by syllables, divide, with your dead body, To measure out, deal out, distribute, To measure, pass over, traverse, pace off, sail through, to measure, estimate, judge, value, by profit, accommodates herself % to measure, mete, measure off, mark out, lay out, pitch his camp, to encamp, P. pass. % to fear, be afraid, stand in fear, be apprehensive, for his life, afraid of Hannibal, anxious about, that he cannot bear, awaited with fear, shun, fear from you, shrink from putting to the test, be averse, shrinking from % to reap, mow, crop, gather, collect, harvest, cut down, as you sow, so shall you reap, to gather, gather the pollen, To cut off, pluck, crop, laid waste, To mow down, cut down, destroy % fear, dread, apprehension, anxiety
circummetior -- to be measured around.
circummetio -- tr., mesurer autour
intermetium -- the space between the goals#
supermetior -- to mete out abundantly*
praemetium -- the offering of the firstfruits measured out beforehand for Ceres
praemetor -- to measure, measure out beforehand, pass.
praemeto -- tr., couper les prémices de la moisson
permetior -- to measure through, measure out, measure
commeto -- to visit habitually#
commetior -- to measure:
dimetior -- to measure, measure out, lay out
dimeto -- délimiter.
dimetor -- to measure out, mark out
remetior -- to measure again
remetio -- Vulg. c. remetior.
demeto -- to mow, reap, cut off, gather, crop, harvest
demetior -- to measure off, measure out
demetor -- - tr. - délimiter, borner.
admetior -- to measure out:
__metu
praemetuo -- to fear beforehand, be apprehensive
__mug
to low, bellow, To roar, rumble, bray, groan
circummugio -- tr., mugir autour
commugeo -- zusammenbrüllen, -schreien
remugio -- to bellow back, low in answer
admugio -- to low to, bellow to:
immugio -- to bellow in, resound inwardly
__mun
duties, functions, official duties % to wall, defend with a wall, fortify, defend, protect, secure, strengthen, for use in fortifications, with palisades and a trench, build and fortify, To defend, guard, secure, protect, shelter, to make, make passable, open, pave, to guard, secure, strengthen, support, viam, to make a way, prepared your way
circummunio -- to wall around, fortify, secure:
supermunio -- to fortify, protect above
praemunio -- to fortify in front
permunio -- to finish fortifying, fortify thoroughly
communio -- community, mutual participation; association; sharing; fellowship; communion;*
commune -- that which is common, publicity, the sole credit for common achievements, A community, state, for common use, for all, for a common object, for the general advantage, equally upon patricians and plebeians, halves!, in general, all, commonplaces*
admunio -- - tr. - annexer à une enceinte fortifiée.
immunio -- to fortify
__not
a means of recognition, mark, sign, stamp, impression, tattooed, is marked, brand with, bruise, significant marks, written characters, signs, letters.&mdash; A critical mark, marginal note, letters, alphabetic writing, large letters, the letter, memoranda, a brand, stamp, kind, quality, wines of these brands. &mdash;A nod, beck, sign, a mark, sign, token, signs, A distinguishing mark, characteristic, note, by a marked peculiarity of dialect, with the note of the present time, a censorial reproach, judgment of degradation, not excluding any one, A mark of ignominy, badge of infamy, reproach, disgrace, am degraded, reproachful surname % to become known; to become famous; % to mark, designate with a mark, writes and erases, to signify, indicate, denote, was pointed at, To mark, note, single out, designate, To mark, observe, To mark, brand, censure, reprimand % acquaintances, friends % I. a precious stone, said to fall with the rain, also called ombria II. a plant, also called herba mularis
circumnoto -- to paint, portray around
praenoto -- To mark, note before, in front, seal
pernotesco -- to become generally known
pernoto -- tr., remarquer, noter avec soin
subnoto -- To mark, note, write underneath
adnoto -- to observe, remark:
denoto -- to mark out, point out, specify, indicate, designate
innotesco -- to become known, be made conspicuous;
innoto -- to mark, observe, take notice of
__obr
to overwhelm, overthrow, cover, cover over, hide, bury
circumobruo -- to cover around with, wrap around
adobruo -- to cover up with earth, to bury*
__ret
a net, a toil, snare % trees standing on the bank, in the bed of a stream, to clear, free from obstructions % a net % a net % tr., nettoyer le lit d'une rivière
circumretio -- to enclose with a net, insnare.
proreta -- the lookout man at the prow, the under-pilot#
irretio -- to catch in a net, to ensnare, entangle
obretio -- to eatch in a net, to entangle
__sec
to cut, cut off, cut up, reap, carve, is carved, carved ivory, to cut, operate on, cut off, cut out, amputate, excise, was operated on, To scratch, tear, wound, hurt, injure, lest I should be torn, To cut apart, divide, cleave, separate, half the earth, To cut through, run through, pass through, traverse, cleave, To cut, make by cutting, produce by flight, speeds on his way, to divide, To cut short, decide, settle, To follow, pursue
circumseco -- to cut around:
subterseco -- to cut, divide, separate underneath
700
interseco -- to cut asunder, separate, divide, intersect
praeseca -- un chou.#
praeseco -- to cut off before, cut away, cut off, cut out
conseco -- to cut to pieces, cut up
disseco -- to cut asunder, cut in pieces, cut up, dissect
perseco -- to cut up, extirpate, cut out
proseco -- to cut off, cut away
subseco -- to cut under, cut away below, clip, pare
deseco -- to cut off, cut away
reseco -- to cut loose, cut off
exseco -- to cut out, cut away, remove
inseco -- to cut into, cut up
__ser
a row, succession, series, chain, a series, chain, connection, train, sequence, succession, order, course, connection, succession, A line of descent, lineage % to be a servant, be enslaved, serve, be in service, to be devoted, serve, labor for, aim at, have regard to, To be subject, be governed by, be enslaved to, To comply with, court, humor, gratify, conform, flatter, to be under a servitude, be subject to an easement % to make safe, save, keep unharmed, preserve, guard, keep, protect, deliver, rescue, To keep, lay up, preserve, reserve, retain, store, to keep, keep to, hold, remain in, dwell in, inhabit, to keep, keep to, preserve, maintain, observe, provided public rights were not violated, to maintain the price, to keep in view, give heed, pay attention, take care, watch, observe, kept watch, beware, to observe, to observe the lightning % a bar, cross-bar, bolt % a cylindrical earthen vessel, large jar, tun, cask % to bind together, interweave, entwine, P. perf., of mail, to join, connect, link together, combine, compose, contrive, linked with, is arranged, engaging in continual wars, compose % a slave, servant, serf, serving-man, slaves of the public, a slave, servant, vassal, subject % -I. to grow dry -II. to turn to whey % earnestness, seriousness; serious matters or discourse % a female slave, hand-woman, maid % the watery part of curdled milk, whey
circumsero -- to sow, set, plant around something
supersero -- to sow over, upon, to sow in addition
transsero -- I. To pass or thrust through II. To transfer by grafting, to ingraft
intersero -- to place between, interpose, add
praesero -- to sow beforehand
/conseruo -- to retain, keep safe, maintain, preserve, spare
consero -- to connect, entwine, tie, join, fit, bind, unite, pinned together, To join, bring together, manum, manūs, manu, to fight hand to hand, join battle, I summon you to a trial face to face, pugnam or proelium, was grappled, employed in fight
/perseruio -- to serve throughout
persero -- to stick, run through
/subseruio -- to serve, come to the help of, aid
subsero -- to sow, plant after
prosero -- to stretch forth, extend
/obseruo -- to watch, note, heed, observe, take notice of, attend to
obsero -- to bolt, bar, fasten, shut up*
/reseruo -- to keep back, save up, reserve
resero -- to unlock, unclose, open
desero -- to undo or sever (one's connection with another); to leave, forsake, abandon, desert, give up;
/deseruio -- to serve zealously, be devoted, be subject, be of service
insero -- to implant, ingraft
/inseruio -- to be serviceable, be devoted, be submissive, serve
/inseruo -- To attend to, observe
/adseruo -- to watch over, keep, preserve, guard:
/adseruio -- to help, assist, strengthen (once):
ansera -- oie.#
__seru
praeseruo -- to observe beforehand
praeseruio -- to serve
conserua -- a (female) fellow slave
conseruo -- to retain, keep safe, maintain, preserve, spare
perseruo -- to preserve
perseruio -- to serve throughout
/persero -- to stick, run through
subseruio -- to serve, come to the help of, aid
/subsero -- to sow, plant after
/prosero -- to stretch forth, extend
obseruo -- to watch, note, heed, observe, take notice of, attend to
/obsero -- to bolt, bar, fasten, shut up
reseruo -- to keep back, save up, reserve
/resero -- to unlock, unclose, open
/desero -- to undo or sever (one's connection with another); to leave, forsake, abandon, desert, give up;
deseruio -- to serve zealously, be devoted, be subject, be of service
/insero -- to implant, ingraft
inseruio -- to be serviceable, be devoted, be submissive, serve
inseruo -- To attend to, observe
adseruo -- to watch over, keep, preserve, guard:
adseruio -- to help, assist, strengthen (once):
__sol
a sole, sandal, slipper, A clasp for the feet, fetter, A kin&lt;*&gt; of shoe for animals, A kind of fish, sole % to use, be wont, be accustomed % a seat, official seat, chair of state, chair, throne, a throne, rule, sway, dominion, A tub, bathing-tub, A stone coffin, sarcophagus % to comfort, console, solace, your words of comfort, To soothe, ease, lighten, lessen, relieve, assuage, mitigate % to loosen, unbind, unfasten, unfetter, untie, release, untie, let down, thawed, from service, freely opens, unfurl, To detach, remove, part, disengage, free, to bring forth, to free from land, set sail, weigh anchor, leave land, depart, To untie, unfasten, unlock, unseal, open, uncovered, To take apart, disintegrate, disunite, dissolve, separate, break up, scatter, dismiss, disorganized, To relax, benumb, make torpid, weaken, unflagging, To loosen, break up, part, dissolve, disperse, divide, scatter, To dissolve, melt, turn, change, melt, to loose, remove, cancel, untie, unlock, relaxes his hold, to free, set free, release, loose, emancipate, relieve, exempt, be exempted, release the testamentary heirs, the law does not apply to, from cares, awoke.&mdash; To acquit, absolve, cleanse, relieve, be held guiltless, To relax, smooth, unbend, quiet, soothe, be cleared, to remove, cancel, destroy, efface, make void, annul, overthrow, subvert, violate, abolish, subvert, took back, To loosen, impair, weaken, scatter, disperse, dissolve, destroy, To end, remove, relieve, soothe, the siege raised, To accomplish, fulfil, complete, keep, finish the burial rites, fulfil, you have kept your promise, your pledge, To solve, explain, remove, are refuted, to fulfil, pay, discharge, pay off, settled, a debt of long standing, to make payment, pay, pay by a draft on Egnatius, to stop payments, able to pay its debt, to be solvent, was insolvent, to pay, pay over, hand over, the expenses of the funeral, paid the promised gifts, in cash, to accomplish, fulfil, suffer, undergo % M % to make lonely, desolate; to lay waste, desolate
/circumsoluo -- tr., délier autour
consolor -- to encourage, animate, console, cheer, comfort
consolo -- to cheer, comfort, console
/consoluo -- tr., faire dissoudre ensemble
/dissoluo -- to unloose; to dissolve, destroy; to melt; to pay; to refute; to annul;
/persoluo -- to unravel, solve, explain
/subsoluo -- tr., dissoudre un peu
desolo -- to leave alone, forsake, abandon, desert
/desoluo -- to pay
/resoluo -- to untie, unfasten, unbind, loose, loosen, release, open
/adsoleo -- to be accustomed, be wont, be usual:
/exsoluo -- to loose, unloose, set loose, release, deliver, free
exsolo -- c. exsulo.??
assolo -- to level to the ground, to destroy#
/insoleo -- to be wont
/insolesco -- to grow haughty, become elated
insolo -- to place in the sun, expose to the sun#
/obsoleo -- - intr. - 1 - n'être plus en usage, être tombé en désuétude. - 2 - perdre de sa force.
/obsolesco -- to wear out, grow old, decay, fall into disuse, lose value, become obsolete
__solu
circumsoluo -- tr., délier autour
/consolor -- to encourage, animate, console, cheer, comfort
/consolo -- to cheer, comfort, console
consoluo -- tr., faire dissoudre ensemble
dissoluo -- to unloose; to dissolve, destroy; to melt; to pay; to refute; to annul;
persoluo -- to unravel, solve, explain
subsoluo -- tr., dissoudre un peu
/desolo -- to leave alone, forsake, abandon, desert
desoluo -- to pay*
resoluo -- to untie, unfasten, unbind, loose, loosen, release, open
exsoluo -- to loose, unloose, set loose, release, deliver, free
/exsolo -- c. exsulo.
/assolo -- to level to the ground, to destroy
/insolo -- to place in the sun, expose to the sun
__sole
obsoleo -- - intr. - 1 - n'être plus en usage, être tombé en désuétude. - 2 - perdre de sa force.
obsolesco -- to wear out, grow old, decay, fall into disuse, lose value, become obsolete
insoleo -- to be wont
insolesco -- to grow haughty, become elated
adsoleo -- to be accustomed, be wont, be usual:
__ten
to hold, keep, have, grasp, hold fast, was palpable, to hold in mind, take in, understand, conceive, comprehend, know, you understand the situation, I understand, to hold, possess, be master of, control, occupy, command, to control public affairs, should be mastered, who are in supreme power, held my affections, are you restored to me?, to hold fast, keep, occupy, watch, guard, defend, maintain, retain, to hold, keep, maintain, follow up, to hold one's course, sailed, blows the wrong way, to hold fast, guard, preserve, uphold, keep, insist on, To hold fast, maintain, support, defend, uphold, insist, maintain, to hold, keep, preserve a recollection of, you remember, recollect, to possess, occupy, control, has had possession of you, to be controlled, to be fascinated, To hold position, maintain oneself, stay, be posted, To hold out, hold on, last, endure, continue, maintain itself, prevail, to reach, arrive at, attain, occupy, to reach, gain, acquire, obtain, attain, to hold fast, hold back, hinder, restrain, detain, check, control, stay, reflex., to keep back, remain, stay, refrain, to hold, hold back, repress, restrain, bind, fetter, keep to themselves, to bind, hold, obligate, be binding on, control, to be liable, to be convicted, to take in, comprise, comprehend, include % to make thin, make slender, wear away, dilute, rarefy, attenuate, make lean, dissolve, contracted, waning, to make small, lessen, diminish, reduce, weaken, enfeeble, to degrade % weak, trifling, insignificant, mean, low
circumteneo -- to keep around, to possess
subteneo -- to hold underneath
perteneo -- to hold constantly, keep hold of, hold fast
__tenu
extenuo -- to make small, reduce, diminish
attenuo -- to make thin, attenuate, lessen, diminish, the tablets had diminished, to reduce, impair, lessen, diminish, weaken, to abase, make less formidable, waste
subtertenuo -- to make, thin below, at the lower part
__ton
to resound % to make a loud noise, roar, resound, thunder, to thunder forth, invoke thunderingly, To thunder
circumtono -- to thunder around:
contono -- it thunders violently/loudly/heavily;
contonat -- it thunders heavily
cottona -- small Syrian figs#
pertono -- to thunder violently, Act., to proclaim aloud, thunder forth, announce
protono -- to thunder forth
attono -- to thunder at, stun, terrify:
detono -- to thunder down, thunder
ditonum -- le diton [terme de mus.]#
intono -- to thunder
retono -- to thunder back, resound
antonesco -- devenir semblable à Antoine#
cotona -- a kind of small Syrian fig#
cotoneum -- coing??
cotonia -- ??
cotonea -- a plant, wallwort, comfrey, black briony??
atonia -- faiblesse de la vessie.??
__uag
to stroll about, go to and fro, ramble, wander, roam, range, rove, to wander, roam, be lost, waver, spread, extend, be diffused, are irregular in movement, expatiate, spreads, circulate % to cry, squall, scream % act., to wander
circumuagor -- to wander about
superuagor -- to wander too far, spread too much
peruagor -- to wander over, range through, rove about, overrun
obuagio -- to whine or whimper about
deuagor -- to wander, to stray from
diuagor -- to wander, wander about
euagor -- to wander forth, march to and fro
euago -- c. evagor
__uis
to look at attentively, view, behold, survey, worth seeing.&mdash;To go to look, see to, look after, ascertain, To go to see, visit, is visited % a looking, look, act of seeing, power of sight, vision, looks fiercely on, vanished, A thing seen, sight, appearance, apparition, vision, Appearance, seeming % a thing seen, sight, appearance, vision, an image produced by a sensation, representation % a stench
circumuiso -- to look around at, glare round upon
interuiso -- to look after, inspect secretly
prouisus -- a looking forward, distant view, A foreseeing, A caring for beforehand
prouiso -- to go forth to see, see to it
conuiso -- to shine upon
peruiso -- to behold, contemplate
inuiso -- to look after, go to see, visit
reuiso -- to look back, look back to see, come back to inquire
__exercit
to practice, exercise, train hard, keep at work; % a disciplined body of men, army, infantry, A multitude, host, swarm, flock % training, exercise
coexercito -- tr., exercer simultanément
__crepit
to rattle, creak, crackle, clatter, rustle, rumble, chatter, murmur, to ring % a rattling, creaking, clattering, clashing, rustling, chattering, crackling
concrepito -- to rattle, sound much, loudly
800
discrepito -- to, disagree wholly, to be altogether different2
increpito -- to keep chiding, urge, scold, nag, harass with words, mock at, To urge, encourage2
__sermon
to talk, parley, converse, discourse % c. sermocinor
consermonor -- to converse with one, to talk
__seru
the condition of a slave, service, slavery, servitude, as your servant, free from slavery, servitude, subjection, Collect., a body of servants, Servants
conseruitium -- joint servitude
obseruito -- to watch carefully, observe closely
__strict
constricto -- to draw together;
__terr
to put in terror, frighten, affright, alarm, terrify
conterrito -- to frighten much, greatly
perterrito -- to frighten, terrify thoroughly
__uolner
to wound/injure/harm, pain/distress; to inflict wound on; to damage (things/interest)
conuolnero -- to wound severely
__uen
refugees (pl.), immigrants; those together for some purpose (asylum); tramps; % to come together, meet, assemble, gather, come in a body
disconuenio -- to disagree, be inconsistent
__cooper
to cover, cover over, overwhelm, bury, P. pass., buried, involved, covered % to work with, together, combine, unite
discooperio -- to uncover, disclose, lay bare, expose
__consul
deliberation, consideration, A decree, decision, resolution, plan, plans, responses, decrees, a decree of the senate, of the council % to reflect, consider maturely, consult, take counsel, deliberate, to take care, have a care, To consult, advise with, ask counsel of % conseil
inconsultum -- - 1 - défaut de consultation. - 2 - J.-Val. imprudence.
__elegant
taste, propriety, finement, grace, elegance % Comp., sup.
inelegantia -- tastelessness, inelegance;, want of harmony, inconsistency, t.
__strep
a confused noise, din, clash, crash, rustle, rattle, clatter, murmur, a sound % to clatter, be noisy
instrepito -- to make a noise, humming over the flowers
obstrepito -- to sound against, to interrupt by noise, clamor
__cess
to be remiss, delay, loiter, cease from, stop, give over, you are delaying shamefully, whatever delay there was, to lack spirit, to my hurt, to be inactive, be idle, be unoccupied, do nothing, played truant, to have leisure for, to be at rest, rest, be still, be inactive, be unused, pause, cease, stop, remained unsought, long unopened, to lie fallow, does he hesitate?, makes up for lost time, Supin. acc., lay at rest
intercessus -- an intervention;, abl. sing.
retrocessus -- a going back, backwards, retrocession
concesso -- to cease/desist temporarily, leave off; to rest;
concessus -- a concession, permission, leave, sing.
concessum -- chose permise
concessa -- choses permises. - concessa petere, Virg. : demander ce qui peut être accorder.
discessus -- a going asunder, parting, lightning.&mdash;A going away, departure, removal, withdrawal, banishment, A marching away, marching off, decamping
successus -- a coming up, advance, approach, a happy issue, good result, success
abscessus -- a going away, departure, absence:
incesso -- to fall upon, assault, assail, attack, beset, to reproach, revile, assail
incessus -- a going, walking, pace, gait, tread, step, peculiarities of gait, An advance, approach, An attack, hostile approach
secessus -- a separation, retirement, solitude, A hiding-place, ravine, retreat, a deep recess
accessus -- a coming near, approach, was escorted by, a way of approach, passage, entrance, for the ships
accessa -- the flood-tide#
decessus -- a going away, departure, A withdrawal, retirement, A subsidence, ebbing, Decease, death
excessus -- a departure, demise, A digression
recessus -- a going back, receding, retiring, retreat, departure, means of retreat, A remote place, retired spot, nook, corner, retreat, recess, our remote position, in a deep recess, inner chamber, inner rooms, a withdrawal, advance&lt;*&gt; and retreats, shade and background
recessa -- reflux de la mer#
__stit
interstities -- interstice.
interstitium -- a space between, interstice, interval
superstito -- Act., to keep alive, preserve#
instita -- a border, flounce of a lady's tunic#
institium -- a standing still
instito -- ??
restito -- to stay behind, loiter, tarry, hold back, resist, on the spot, almost against their will*
__stitu
praestituo -- to determine beforehand, fix in advance, prescribe, without a fixed term
constituo -- to put, place, set, station, fix their abode,, put away,, To place, station, post, array, form, draw up, To halt, cause to halt, stop, To form, constitute, To erect, set up, build, construct, fix, found, to put, set, place, To prepare, make, establish, effect, constitute, To designate, select, assign, appoint, a trial, To establish, set in order, organize, manage, administer, regulate, arrange, dispose, after making these arrangements, To fix, appoint, determine, define, decide, decree, To appoint, fix by agreement, settle, agree upon, concert, on the day appointed, make an appointment, such is their custom, To determine, take a resolution, resolve, having formed this resolution, To decide, arbitrate, judge, decree
prostituo -- to set forth in public, expose to dishonor, prostitute, offer for sale
substituo -- to present, submit, figure to himself, To put instead, put in place of, substitute, throw on him the blame
destituo -- to set down, set forth, put away, bring forward, leave alone, To leave, abandon, forsake, fail, lost his footing, to forsake, abandon, desert, betray, defraud of their stipulated reward
instituo -- to put in place, plant, fix, set, to set one's heart on, to draw up, arrange, To set up, erect, plant, found, establish, arrange, set, To make, build, fabricate, construct, To make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, to institute, found, establish, organize, set up, organized, To constitute, appoint, designate, single out, be adopted, To ordain, To undertake, begin, commence, had opened commerce, made it a practice.&mdash;To purpose, determine, resolve upon, according to his custom, purposed, To order, govern, administer, regulate, control, direct, To teach, instruct, train up, educate, to give instruction
restituo -- to set up again, replace, restore, reconstruct, rebuild, revive, renew, reform, rearrange, raise the dead, To give back, deliver up, return, restore, replace, make restitution of, to restore, revive, renew, reform, repair, remedy, recovered, To bring back, restore, recall, reinstate, reconcile, join the Romans again, pardoned, To restore, re-establish, re-enact, To reverse, revoke, undo, make void, make good again, repair, cancelled, To compensate for, make good, that the damage be repaired
__uell
to pluck, pull, tear away, pull out, take up, To pull down, tear down, destroy, To pull, twitch, pluck % a country-house, country-seat, farm, villa.
interuello -- - tr. - 1 - arracher par intervalles, çà et là, par places. 2 - élaguer, éclaircir.??
praeuello -- to tear away before, to tear away
conuello -- to tear away, pluck up, pull off, wrest, rend
peruello -- to pull, twitch
subuello -- to pluck up, pull out
diuello -- to tear apart, rend asunder, tear in pieces, separate violently, tear
reuello -- to pluck away, pull away, tear out, tear off
deuello -- 
auello -- to tear away, rend off, pluck, snatch away, To tear away, remove by force, be separated, leave the place, To pluck away, rescue
euello -- to tear out, pluck out, extract
__moue
- to shake/stir up, agitate; to displace, disturb, trouble/worry, upset; to jolt; - to waken; to provoke; to move (money/camp); to produce; to cause, start (war); to raise
praecommoueo -- to move greatly
__tract
to draw violently, drag, tug, haul, pull, To touch, take in hand, handle, To wield, manage, control, plays upon, to handle, manage, conduct, lead, carry on, practise, transact, act, conducted himself, is by no means accustomed to.&mdash;To treat, conduct oneself towards, To handle, treat, investigate, discuss, to be meditated, To negotiate, treat % a drawing, dragging, hauling, pulling, drawing out, trailing, A train, track, course, in a long train, A stretch, extent, A territory, district, region, tract of land, course, progress, movement, A drawing out, lengthening, drawling % any thing drawn out at length. % - a - morceau de pâte allongée. - b - emplâtre.
praetracto -- - tr. - Tac. examiner d'abord.
pertracto -- to touch, handle
retracto -- to handle again, take in hand again, undertake anew, touches anew the unheeled sores, to consider, examine again, review, revise, the negotiation is renewed, To withdraw, draw back, refuse, decline, be reluctant, have no reason for revoking
attractus -- part. passé de adtraho. - a - tiré, attiré. - b - froncé, contracté.
__trect=tract
detrecto -- to decline, refuse, reject, shirk
__ment
an invention, fabrication, pretence, fiction, falsehood % to invent, devise a falsehood % to delineate, sketch;, to demonstrate on the face, to cudgel, beat % to meditate, think over, study, deliberate, weigh, prepare, deliberation, to prepare, produce, compose, write, To declaim, exercise in speaking, practise oratory, To meditate, purpose
recommentor -- se rappeler.
__accend
to kindle, set on fire, light, flashed up, bundles of twigs attached to the horns, the noonday heat, to kindle, inflame, fire, excite, arouse, stir, awaken, stimulate, provoke, encourage, exasperate, embitter, you inflame my desire the more, to war % a kindling, a setting on fire
redaccendo -- to kindle again, rekindle
reaccendo -- to kindle anew
__fend%
to ward off, repel, avert, keep off
subdefendo -- - tr. - défendre quelque peu.
__diffid
to distrust, be diffident, be distrustful, despair
subdiffido -- to be distrustful
__fend
to hit, thrust, strike, dash against, having stumbled, strikes on, run aground, bite a stone, To hit upon, light upon, come upon, meet with, find, catch, come upon you unawares, to suffer damage, receive an injury, To stumble, blunder, make a mistake, commit a fault, offend, be offensive, give offence to, To find fault, be displeased, take offence, To fail, miscarry, be defeated, suffer misfortune, be unfortunate, lose his cause, met with disaster, a disaster might occur, To trespass upon, shock, offend, vex, displease, repel, disgust, injure, provoke, was hurt, am not offended at the loss of
suboffendo -- to give some offence
__struct
substructum -- med.??
__emic
to spring out, spring forth, break forth, leap up
superemico -- to spring, burst forth over
__mine
to stand out, project, reach upward, to be prominent, stand out, be conspicuous, is distinctly heard, To distinguish oneself, be eminent % a measure, the half of a, measure % Plaut. menacer.
superemineo -- to overtop, surmount, rise above, tower over
praeemineo -- g, delightful*
proemineo -- to project
__nat
to swim away, escape by swimming
superenato -- to swim over
__flor
to bloom, blossom, flower, To froth, To be filled, abound, is splendid, to flourish, be prosperous, be in good repute, be eminent, be distinguished % to blossom, flower, bloom, to begin to flourish, rise, grow into repute % c. floreo.
superfloresco -- - intr. - Plin. refleurir.
praefloreo -- to flower, blossom before the time
praefloro -- to deflower beforehand, lessen, tarnish
confloreo -- int., fleurir ensemble
perfloreo -- int., se couvrir de fleurs
effloresco -- to bloom, flourish, abound
effloreo -- to bloom, blossom forth
defloreo -- to shed its blossoms
defloresco -- to drop blossoms, fade, wither, decay, decline
defloro -- to deprive of flowers
infloresco -- to begin to blossom, put forth blossoms
refloreo -- int., refleurir [fig.]
refloresco -- to begin to bloom again, to blossom again.
__iact
to throw, cast, hurl, scatter, To throw about, toss about, shake, flourish, wallow, swing, throw kisses, be rebellious, To drive hither and thither, drive about, toss, To throw away, thrown overboard, To throw out, emit, spread, to torment, disquiet, disturb, stir, stir up, fluctuated in value.&mdash;To consider, examine, discuss, talked about, To throw out, make prominent, pronounce, utter, speak, say, is made a pretext, prae se, utter confidently, To boast of, vaunt, plume oneself upon, delights, se, to exhibit oneself, show off, make a display, boast, take pride, conflicting, impose on the legates, make a prodigal display, To be officious, be active in, devote oneself to % a throwing, casting, hurling, throw, cast, a spear's throw, by a woman, by throwing stones, a throw, cast
superiacto -- To fling, toss up
praeiacto -- to boast excessively*
proiacto -- - tr. - pousser en avant.
subiacto -- to lay, place, put under, to throw out from below
__operi
service, pains, exertion, effort, work, labor, wastes labor, take pains, bestow upon, employ, by whose agency, literary activity.&mdash;A service, rendering of service, in the service of the society, serves as director, serve, to bestow care, take pains, give attention, serve, exert oneself, attend, listen, is busied in, through my means, by my agency, something worth the effort.&mdash;Leisure, spare time, I have no leisure, it is not worth while, if he had time, A day-laborer, journeyman, laborer, workman, artisan, a ninth laborer, rabble hired % to cover, cover over, bury, lashed soundly, To shut, close, filled in, to hide, conceal, dissemble, To overwhelm, burden % to work, labor, toil, take pains, be busied, devote oneself, engrossed, to perform, attend, offer, To serve, do honor, render sacrifice, devoted to thee % to work, labor, toil, take pains; to be busied
superoperio -- to cover over
redoperio -- to wrap up, cover again
adoperor -- - intr. - faire un sacrifice.#
deoperio -- to uncover, disclose
__oper
inopero -- to effect, produce
inoperor -- to effect, operate, produce
__ping
to paint, make by painting % fat, grease
superpingo -- to paint above, over
compingo -- to join together, frame, make by joining, P. perf., To confine, lock up, fasten in, limited3
900
suppingo -- to paint over, suffuse
expingo -- to depict, describe to the life
impingo -- to dash against, throw on, thrust at, fasten upon, will bring against you, To force upon, press upon3
impinguo -- I. Act., to make fat II. Neutr., to become fat2
depingo -- to depict, portray, paint, draw
oppingo -- - tr. - imprimer sur, appliquer.
repingo -- to paint, form again
appingo -- to paint upon (very rare):
__poll
to be strong, be powerful, flourish, thrive, be able, prevail, avail % to soil, defile, stain, foul, pollute, to defile, pollute, contaminate, violate, dishonor, desecrate
praepolleo -- to surpass in power
antepolleo -- to be more powerful, to excel, surpass
__pollu
superpolluo -- to cover with pollution
propolluo -- to defile, pollute
__poen=paen
Act., to cause to repent, to displease; Neutr., to repent, be sorry
suppoenitet -- o stamp
__glut
to swallow, gulp, gorge
transglutio -- to swallow down, gulp down, med.
sugglutio -- to hiccup a little*
deglutio -- to swallow down
inglutio -- to swallow down
__dat
to give away, administer % - 1 - don, présent. - 2 - pion joué. % gifts, presents % a giving
circumdati -- 
praedatum -- 
__praend
to lay hold of, to grasp, snatch, seize, catch, take
compraendo -- to lay hold of something on all sides; to take, catch hold of, seize, grasp, apprehend; to comprehend, comprise
repraendo -- to hold back, hold fast, take hold of, seize, catch.
__dormit
to be sleepy, be drowsy, fall asleep, going out, to nod, drowse, be dull
condormito -- int., sommeiller
obdormito -- to fall asleep
__gentil
heathen, pagan, gentile;, subst.
congentiles -- kindred, of the same stock
__genit
postgeniti -- posterity, descendants
__nat
hter % to swim, float, floats, webbed feet, tossed about, swims, To spread about, broaden, To swim, overflow, be overflowed, are inundated, to swim, be feeble, fail, To move about, waver, hover, move to and fro, to fluctuate, waver, be uncertain % born, arisen; made; destined; designed, intended, produced by nature; aged, % a daughter;
subternato -- unterhalb schwimmen
internatium -- spina sacra, le sacrum#
internato -- - intr. - nager au milieu, nager dans.
supernato -- to swim above, on top, to float, dat.
transnato -- n??
praenato -- to swim before, flow by
subnato -- to swim beneath
pronato -- to swim forth, swim along
innato -- to swim in, float upon
abnato -- to swim off, away
adnato -- to swim up:
annato -- To swim to, toward, adnant;, ad
denato -- to swim down
__sen=sene
senatus -- the council of the elders, council of state, Senate, body of senators, the republic, a decree of the Senate, become a senator, choosing, the order of Knights, A meeting of the Senate, session, a quorum, no session, a quorum gave audience, in the meetings of the Senate, attend, a Senate, council of state
__scid
a strip of papyrus bark, leaf of paper, sheet
transscido -- ??
__ar
ground, a building - site, An open space, court, play - ground, A raceground, A threshing-floor, a field for effort % to plough, till, to waste labor, to cultivate, success in agriculture, obtains by cultivation, to plough % an arable field, cultivated land, field, ploughed land, glebe, fields, plains, country, regions, the sea, A shore, coast % a structure for sacrifice, altar, hearth and home, altars and fires, protection, refuge, shelter, a funeral pile, The Altar, low in the south, A monument % to be dry, be parched % wake-robin % an arable field, cornfield;
circumaro -- to plough around, L.
peraro -- to plough through, furrow
subaro -- to plough close to
exaresco -- to dry up, become dry
exaro -- to plough out, dig up, dig out
inaro -- to plow in; to cultivate;
adaro -- to plough carefully
obaro -- to plough around, plough up
suaria -- Inscr. commerce de porcs.??
suarium -- porcherie.??
__diar
diarium -- a daily ration#
diaria -- - 1 - ration journalière. - 2 - Isid. journée, salaire de la journée.
__are
interaresco -- to become dry, dry up, decay
peraresco -- to grow very dry
subaresco -- se dessécher un peu.
inaresco -- to become dry in, to dry up, become quite dry
adaresco -- to dry up
coaresco -- to dry, become dry together
coareo -- int., sécher ensemble
obaresco -- to grow dry, to dry up
amaresco -- - intr. - Aug. devenir amer, s'aigrir.*
amaro -- - tr. - Avien. rendre amer.#
__miser
to feel pity, have compassion, pity, compassionate, commiserate, d pers. impers., that we should pity, nor can I pity % wretchedness, unhappiness, misfortune, misery, woe, suffering, affliction, distress, Trouble, weariness, irksomeness, anxiety % to lament, deplore, commiserate, To feel compassion, pity, compassionate, pitiless, in her heart % avoir pitié de. % to feel pity, have compassion % collat. form of miseror % 
commisereor -- to pity; to excite compassion; to show pity at
commiseror -- to commiserate, pity, bewail:
commiseresco -- to commiserate, have sympathy with.
commisero -- c. commiseror.
immiseror -- to pity, commiserate
__flict
- tr. - affliger, frapper. % a striking, clashing
conflicto -- to come in conflict, collide, to ruin
conflictor -- to struggle, wrestle, conflict, engage, be afflicted, To contend, struggle, litigate, by a more reputable process, on a most unfair issue
conflictus -- a striking together, sing, A wrestling, struggle
adflicto -- to break to pieces, destroy, shatter, damage, injure, were broken in the shallows, to crush, put an end to, To trouble, disquiet, distress, harass, reflex., to grieve, be greatly troubled
efflicto -- to strike dead
__quass
to shake violently, toss, brandish, wave, nodding pod, To shatter, shiver, dash to pieces, batter, to shake, shatter, impair, weaken % a shaking, agitating
conquasso -- to shake severely:
__dissert
to discuss, debate, treat
edisserto -- to set forth in full, explain, relate
__cale
to be warm, be hot, glow, while still warm, to glow, be roused, be warmed, be inflamed, to become enamoured of, To be troubled, perplexed, to labor under, fume, a labo, ratory, To be driven hotly, be urged on zealously, ripened, rage % a piece, billet of wood % to grow warm, be heated, to become excited, glow, be inflamed, to be inspired % to be bald % c. calvor % v. calvor. % - 1 - passif être abusé, être trompé. - 2 - déponent chercher à s'échapper, tromper. % c. caleo. % the scalp, bald head
concaleo -- to be thoroughly warm
concalesco -- to grow hot, glow:
percalesco -- to be heated through, grow very warm
incalesco -- to grow warm, be heated, glow
ancala -- the bend of the knee, the knee#
decalesco -- to become warm
excalesco -- to become warm, med.
recaleo -- to grow warm again, to remain warm, be warm, still run warm
recalesco -- to become warm again, grow warm
secale -- a kind of grain, rye;, black spelt#
occalesco -- to become warm
__cal
procalo -- - tr. - provoquer.
concalo -- tr., convoquer
intercalo -- to proclaim an insertion in the calendar, insert, intercalate (a prerogative of the pontifices)*
incalo -- tr., invoquer
__calu
decaluo -- to make bald, to remove the hair#
__min=mine
projecting points, pinnacles, threats, menaces, throw out threats, away with, rising in menace, Threats % to make small, lessen, diminish, divide into small pieces, chop into small pieces, by feeding on it, To diminish, ebb, at ebbtide, to lessen, diminish, lower, reduce, weaken, abate, restrict, change, grow less, diminish in size, discouraged, settle, to be refuted, restrict, limit, offend against % a silver mina (a Greek money of account, about $18.05 or &pound;3 14s. 4d.) % - intr. - faire saillie, avancer. % to color with red-lead, cinnabar, to paint red % arch., c. minor 1
transmineo -- - intr. - Plaut. faire saillie, dépasser, ressortir.
praemineo -- to transcend, excel
comminisco -- (tr.  inus., cf. memini), imaginer / inventer / avec sens pass., imaginé
promineo -- to stand out, jut, be prominent, overhang, project, extend
1000
subminia -- a kind of garment for women#
immineo -- to project over, lean towards, hang down over, overhang, overarch
reminisco -- c. reminiscor
__minu
imminuo -- to lessen, diminish
deminuo -- to make smaller, lessen, diminish
diminuo -- to shatter; to break; to dash to pieces (L+S); to violate/outrage; to lessen/diminish (Ecc);
dimminuo -- to break to pieces, shatter, break
comminuo -- to divide into small parts, break, crumble, crush, split:
__semin
seminium -- a begetting, procreation
semino -- to sow, bring forth, produce
__min
commino -- to drive together
promino -- to drive forward, along
omino -- to forebode, prognosticate, to augur, presage, predict, prophesy^
__minor
ominor -- to forbode, prognosticate, augur, interpret, presage, predict, prophesy, may his evil wishes fall, had a presentiment, of evil omen
comminor -- to threaten, menace:
praeminor -- to threaten beforehand, to threaten greatly
interminor -- to threaten, forbid with threats
__cord
catgut, a string (of a musical instrument): chordae intentae: resonat (vox) chordis quattuor ima, i. e. most acute, H.:
praecordia -- the muscle which parts the chest from the abdomen, midriff, diaphragm, stopped his breath, The entrails, stomach, The breast, heart, lay their breasts upon, folly
praecordium -- diaphragme
discordo -- to be at variance, differ, quarrel, to be unlike, be opposed, protests, To mutiny
discordia -- disunion, disagreement, dissension, variance, discord, inconsistency, the subject of strife, Mutiny, rebellion, the goddess of discord
discordium -- discord, dissension.&mdash;Plur.
concordia -- an agreeing together, union, harmony, concord, a beautiful friendship, likeness in difference, the goddess of Concord
concordo -- to agree, be united, be of one mind, harmonize, to be consistent, be in harmony, agree
recordor -- to think over, bethink oneself of, be mindful of, call to mind, remember, recollect, lay to heart
recordo -- tr., faire ressouvenir, rappeler au souvenir
excordo -- - tr. - ôter la raison (à qqn, aliquem).
secordia -- dulness of mind
__rupt
praeruptum -- the rocky wall, line, or wall of rocks
praerupta -- steep, rugged places.
corrupta -- ??
abruptum -- a steep ascent or descent
derupta -- precipices
__pedit
suppedito -- to give in abundance, furnish bountifully, provide, supply freely, To be fully supplied, be present in abundance, be at hand, be in store, abound, be available, if he had lived, I have neither ideas nor words, To be enough, suffice, avail
impedito -- to hinder, impede
__prend
to catch, take hold of; to arrest, capture; to reach; to understand; to seize, grasp; to occupy;
deprendo -- to seize/catch; to catch napping/redhanded; to surprise/pounce on; to arrest; to intercept;
reprendo -- to hold back, hold fast, take hold of, seize, catch.
__prehend=prend
comprehendo -- to bind together, unite:
apprehendo -- to seize, take hold of:
__uent
an acquisition: , A device, contrivance, invention
ad.in.uentum -- an invention
__pertin
to stretch out, reach, extend, to reach, extend, pervaded, that which was felt in parts, not becoming everywhere known, To belong, relate, pertain, be pertinent, concern, refer, is nothing to the point, as far as concerned, is to the point.&mdash;To apply, be applicable, suit, be suitable, on whom suspicion should fall, To belong, be the right of, To have a tendency, tend, lead, conduce, threatened your safety, to be useful, what end did it serve?
adpertineo -- to belong to, appertain to;, ad
__stat
an image, statue, monumental figure, representation in metal % to cause to stand, set up, set, station, fix upright, erect, plant, to pitch, had drawn up, is taken to the banquet, To construct and place, set up, erect, make, build, in his honor, a statue of you, found, To cause to stand firm, strengthen, support, to establish, constitute, ordain, fix, settle, set forth, first admit it against yourself, is recounted, to constitute, appoint, create, to determine, fix, impose, set, that a limit should be assigned, imposed restraints upon, by not limiting his success, make an end of, to fix, appoint, set, To decide, determine, settle, fix, bring about, choose, make a decision, to try the cause and decide, decide on the punishment of, sat in judgment upon, to decide, make up one's mind, conclude, determine, be convinced, to make up my mind, To decree, order, ordain, enact, prescribe, agreed, decreed a salary, to decree, measure out, inflict, pass sentence, treat harshly, sentence of death to be passed.&mdash;To resolve, determine, purpose, propose, to decline the office, to have firmly and deliberately resolved, To judge, declare as a judgment, be of opinion, hold, be convinced, conclude, think, consider, who holds that to be the law, had become convinced, inferred, that they hold an erroneous opinion, thought it necessary to deprive, knew, as he thought, regarded not as adversaries, but as foes, regarded % a station, position, place, dislodge, A standing, way of standing, posture, position, attitude, station, carriage, pose, what figure you cut, Position, order, arrangement, state, condition, aspect, standing, condition, state, position, situation, rank, status, the social position of the aristocracy, to maintain my character, a position, place, from its balance, utterly confounded, unbalance, become unsettled, to abandon my position, to excite scruples against profaning, a condition, state, public order, organization, constitution, commercial prosperity, internal peace, the political relations, the government had never been permanent, the constitution, the existence of the republic, what institutions, the controverted point, substance of dispute, method of inquiry
antestatus -- P. a.; subst., a witness
__plac
to please, give pleasure, be approved, be pleasing, be agreeable, be acceptable, suit, satisfy, if I suit you, whatever he fancied, I await their pleasure, was less satisfied with, are full of complacency, to find favor, give satisfaction, be applauded, it is believed, is settled, is agreed, seems right, if you please, no matter which, they determined, it is agreed, as the founder holds, have taught, who have made up their minds that, please the gods!, It is resolved, is determined, is decided, is purposed, your decision, that the senate de cree, I resolved, who likes to send % to quiet, soothe, assuage, allay, appease, try to propitiate, To reconcile, conciliate, placate, conciliate, be reconciled, at peace with himself % it is pleasing/satisfying, gives pleasure; is believed/settled/agreed/decided % int., plaire
beneplaceo -- to please
complaceo -- to please greatly:
complaco -- to conciliate greatly
perplaceo -- to please greatly
deplaco -- to appease, propitiate
__lau
to wash, bathe, lave, in a basin, bathe, To bathe, wash, wet, moisten, bedew, drench, to wash away
circumlauo -- v a., to wash around, to overflow all around
praelauo -- - tr. - laver auparavant.
perlauo -- to wash, bathe thoroughly
sublauo -- to wash from beneath
delauo -- to wash off, wash clean
relauo -- - tr. - Prisc. mouiller de nouveau.
elauo -- to wash out, away, to wash clean
__leu
to lift up, raise, elevate, rise, To make lighter, lighten, relieve, ease, relieved, strip, lighten the ship, To take away, take, takes down, to lighten, relieve, console, refresh, support, slake, To lighten, lessen, alleviate, mitigate, To lessen, diminish, weaken, impair, To relieve, release, discharge, free, To avert
circumleuo -- v a., to raise up all around
praeleuo -- tr., lever d'abord ou auparavant
subleuo -- to lift from beneath, raise up, hold up, support
colleuo -- to make (entirely) smooth; to smooth;
proleuo -- to draw forth
adleuo -- to lift up, raise, set up:
ableuo -- - tr. - soulager.
deleuo -- to smooth off, make smooth*
releuo -- to life up, raise
eleuo -- to lift up, raise; to alleviate; to lessen; to make light of;
__lumbar#
an apron for the loins
columbaria -- Columbaria (île voisine de la Sicile).cc
columbarium -- - 1 - Varr. pigeonnier, colombier. - 2 - Vitr. boulin (niche d'un colombier pour abriter deux pigeons). - 3 - niche (pour l'urne funéraire). - 4 - ouverture ménagée dans le flanc d'un vaisseau pour donner passage à la rame. - 5 - Vitr. boulin (cavité pratiquée dans un mur pour recevoir l'extrémité d'une poutre). - 6 - Vitr. godet (dans une roue à godets).
__press
to press, milk, to be milked
compresso -- to press, oppress
perpressa -- f, a plant, called also#
impresso -- - tr. - imprimer fort.
oppressus -- a pressing down, pressure
__fract#
confractum -- [t. de peinture] présentation de profil [opp. à aequum]
amfractus -- l??
anfractum -- a winding, a crook, curve
__iunct
coniuncto -- c. conjungo.
coniunctum -- connection
disiunctum -- ??
abiunctum -- die kurze (konzise) Ausdrucksweise
adiuncta -- additional circumstances, adjuncts, things closely connected with, belonging, suitable to
adiunctum -- ??
__sepel
to bury, inter
consepelio -- to bury with
__strat
a covering, horse-cloth, housing, saddle, A bed-covering, coverlet, quilt, pillow, A bed, couch % a paved road, way
constratum -- A covering
instratum -- a covering
__amplex
an encircling, surrounding, circuit, my embrace, a loving embrace, caress % to embrace, to be fond of, value, esteem
examplexor -- to clasp, embrace
__prom
to give forth, out abundantly, to distribute, dispose of
exprompto -- fréq. de expromo
__mort=mori
human affairs
immortales -- the immortals, gods
__plicit
implicito -- to entwine, interweave
__bib
to drink, to suck, from a jewelled cup, to be given her to drink, water from, to visit, reach, frequent, dwell in the region of, the Parthians will come to Germany, to be drowned, to take in, absorb, imbibe, have been watered, absorbs moisture, to receive, take in, drink in, thirst for, drew
interbibo -- to drink in, drink up
superbibo -- to drink upon, after
transbibo -- to drink down, drink up
praebibo -- to drink before, drink to
conbibo -- to drink completely up, to absorb, to imbibe; to drink with any one as a companion (very rare);
perbibo -- to drink in
probibo -- tr., boire avant
subbibo -- to drink a little, to tipple
combibo -- od??
adbibo -- to take in by drinking:
debibo -- to drink of
exbibo -- to drink out, drink up
imbibo -- to drink in, imbibe, conceive, form.&mdash;Only fig.
obbibo -- tr., boire entièrement
ebibo -- to drink up, drain; to absorb; to squander;
__lat=late
to lurk, lie hid, be concealed, escape notice, skulk, remained in obscurity, To be hidden, be in safety, seek shelter, To keep out of sight, avoid a summons, To be concealed, remain unknown, escape notice, are obscure, escape
interlateo -- to lurk, lie hid between
perlateo -- to remain hidden
sublateo -- - intr. - être caché dessous.
collatus -- (Lebaigue P. 229 et P. 230)??
1100
relatum -- Aquil. répétition volontaire du même mot.#
__oblat
oblata -- [s.-ent. hostia] hostie
oblatum -- Liv. offre.
__lat
prolato -- to extend, enlarge, To put off, defer, delay, postpone, by procrastination
elato -- Cass. répandre, propager.
tralatus -- a carrying along, a bearing in procession
dilato -- to spread out, dilate, broaden, stretch, enlarge, extend, to spread, amplify, dilate, extend, to pronounce broadly
__lid
to hurt, wound, injure, damage
interlido -- To thrust out of the midst, to strike out
collido -- to strike/dash together; to crush, batter, deform; to set into conflict with each other;
sublido -- to press out
illido -- to strike/beat/dash/push against/on; to injure by crushing; to drive (teeth into);
adlido -- to strike upon, dash against, to ruin
dilido -- - tr. - briser.
oblido -- to squeeze together, compress, strangled
relido -- to strike back, to strike
elido -- to strike out, dash out, tear out, force out, squeeze out, dashed up, To dash to pieces, shatter, crush, to strangle, to strangle, to break down, destroy
__mic
a crumb, bit, morsel, grain % to move quickly to and fro, vibrate, quiver, shake, tremble, beat, palpitate % to bleat
intermico -- to glitter among, to gleam forth, acc., Absol.
supermico -- to leap over, beyond
praemico -- to gleam, glitter forth, to glitter very much
promico -- to gleam forth; transf., to spring forth, start forth
commico -- int., s'agiter ensemble
permicies -- a wasting away, perishing; ruin, destruction, decay*
dimico -- to fight, struggle, contend
__mori
intermorior -- to die off, die out
praemorior -- to die prematurely
/commoror -- to tarry, linger, abide, sojourn, remain, stay:
commorior -- to die with, at the same time with one.
/commoro -- c. commoror.
permorior -- to die
/permoror -- to delay, tarry long
/demoror -- to retard, detain, delay
demorior -- to die off, die (out of a number)
/remoror -- to hold back, stay, detain, obstruct, hinder, delay, defer
/remora -- hindrance; delay;
remoria -- Rémoria (domaine de Rémus, au sommet de l'Aventin, d'où il prit les auspices pour la fondation de Rome).
/immoror -- to tarry, remain in, to stay upon, at, to linger near
immorior -- to die in, die upon, fall upon in death
emorior -- to die off, die, decease
__mor
a delay, procrastination, defer, put off payment, delay, cause delay, interpose delay, delay in pursuing, talking against time, I will without delay, would take too long, he promptly took, on his part, I am ready, at once, hastened it on, with delay, gradually, a stop, pause, An obstruction, hinderance, cause of delay, hinder, an interval, lapse of time % to delay, tarry, stay, wait, remain, linger, loiter, I have no objection, by slow degrees, why make a long story?, to be brief, without long delay, in tearful thought, may linger, I will immediately, brood, To delay, retard, impede, detain, cause to wait, hinder, detain, not, keep waiting, To fix the attention of, delight, delay, amuse, entertain, arrest, P. pass., To hinder, prevent, impede, person, not to detain, let go, dismiss, release, withdraw my accusation against, said he had nothing against, thing, clause, to let go, not value, disregard, care nothing for, have nothing to say against, Ph, I don't care for that, I care not, attach no value to quantity % plur. de mos. % Pass. impers., be spent, lost % a mulberry; a blackberry
/intermorior -- to die off, die out
/praemorior -- to die prematurely
commoror -- to tarry, linger, abide, sojourn, remain, stay:
/commorior -- to die with, at the same time with one.
commoro -- c. commoror.
/permorior -- to die
permoror -- to delay, tarry long
demoror -- to retard, detain, delay
/demorior -- to die off, die (out of a number)
remoror -- to hold back, stay, detain, obstruct, hinder, delay, defer
remora -- hindrance; delay;
/remoria -- Rémoria (domaine de Rémus, au sommet de l'Aventin, d'où il prit les auspices pour la fondation de Rome).
immoror -- to tarry, remain in, to stay upon, at, to linger near
/immorior -- to die in, die upon, fall upon in death
emorior -- to die off, die, decease
__pati
praepatior -- to suffer very much
compatior -- To suffer with one
propatior -- to endure before
__pat
to stand open, lie open, be open, there lies open, To lie open, be exposed, To stretch out, extend, to be open, be free, be allowable, be accessible, be attainable, to be open, be ready to hear, attend, To be exposed, be liable, To extend, To be clear, be plain, be well known, be manifest % to bear, support, undergo, suffer, endure % ely
interpateo -- to be open between, among, to lie between, intervene
dispateo -- - intr. - être ouvert de partout.
perpateo -- int., être ouvert entièrement
suppateo -- to lie open beneath, spread out beneath
repatesco -- int., se propager de nouveau, reprendre faveur
expato -- int., se montrer en public
__tex
to weave, To join, fit together, plait, braid, interweave, construct, make, fabricate, build, to weave, compose, undoes what your writings had accomplished
intertexo -- to intertwine, interweave, intersperse
supertexo -- - tr. - Avien. recouvrir comme d'un tissu.
praetexo -- to weave before, fringe, edge, border
contexo -- to weave, entwine, join, bind
distexo -- to unravel, ravel out
pertexo -- to go through with, accomplish*
subtexo -- to weave under, work in below, sew on
detexo -- to weave, plait
intexo -- to weave in, inweave, interweave, plait, join together, interlace, surround, envelop
retexo -- to unweave, unravel
adtexo -- to add, join on, to link to; to weave/plait on, to attach by weaving;*
extexo -- to unweave;, to plunder, cheat of one's money
obtexo -- to weave over, overspread, cover
__uir
to be green, be verdant, to be fresh, be vigorous, flourish, bloom % a woman % N % to grow green, become verdant % a kind of ornament for the arm, armlets, bracelets, med. % a potent juice, medicinal liquid, poison, venom, virus % un bracelet (pour homme).
interuireo -- to be green here and there, to be green between, among
conuiresco -- to grow green, become verdant
peruireo -- stets grünen
reuireo -- to be green again, be covered again with verdure
reuiresco -- to become green again, recover verdure
euiresco -- to fade, become pale*
euiro -- to deprive of virility, to emasculate, unman2
__uom
to puke, spew, throw up, vomit, To vomit forth, throw out, emit, discharge, to breathe out
interuomo -- to pour forth among
conuomo -- to bespew, vomit upon
prouomo -- to vomit forth
deuomo -- to vomit forth
reuomo -- to spew forth again, vomit up, disgorge, throw up
euomo -- to spew out, vomit forth
__uolucr
a kind of worm, caterpillar that wraps itself up in vineleaves % a kind of worm, caterpillar that wraps itself up in vineleaves
inuolucre -- linge (pour la barbe).
inuolucrum -- a wrapper, covering, case, envelope, a cover, mask
__ege
to need, want, stand in need of, demand, require, To long for, desire
per.indi.geo -- to need very much, to be in great need
__prand
a late breakfast, luncheon (usu. of bread, fish, or cold meats, taken near noon) % to take breakfast, breakfast, eat for luncheon
perprandeo -- int., prendre une collation
__strid
to make a harsh noise, hiss, whiz % to make a shrill noise, sound harshly, creak, hiss, grate, whiz, whistle, rattle, buzz
perstrido -- to roar, whistle through
substrido -- ein wenig zischen
instrido -- to hiss in
astrido -- to hiss at
__cant
canton; % a musical utterance, singing, song, musical play of voice, a playing, music, by music, crowing, at cock-crow, an oracular song, incantation, charm
praecanto -- - tr. - 1 - prédire. - 2 - prononcer des formules magiques, enchanter, en conter à.
succanto -- tr., seriner aux oreilles de qqn
concanto -- tr., chanter avec
decanto -- to sing off, keep singing
excanto -- to charm forth, enchant
accanto -- to sing at
accantus -- 
incanto -- to enchant, fix a spell upon*
occanto -- to bewitch, charm*
recanto -- to charm back, charm away*
ecanto -- chanter
__coep
to begin, commence, P, begun, commenced, undertaken, in process of creation, sought, to begin, be begun, take a beginning, commence, originate, arise
praecoepi -- to begin before
__crep
oX % arch. pour capra % c. caper
praecrepo -- to sound, resound beforehand
concrepo -- to rattle, creak, grate, sound, resound, clash:
discrepo -- to differ in sound, be discordant, fail to harmonize
percrepo -- Neutr., to sound very much, to resound, ring
subcrepo -- to crackle beneath
increpo -- to sound, resound, rustle, patter, rattle, whiz
excrepo -- - tr. - pousser (cri...).
recrepo -- to resound, echo
1200
__moll
to make soft, make supple, soften, by spinning, to pacify, conciliate, moderate, overcome me. &mdash;To soften, moderate, mitigate, tame, restrain, check, ease, lighten, make the ascent easier, render milder, To soften, render effeminate, make unmanly % Weak, untrustworthy % to be soft % to become soft, soften, to become mild, grow gentle, To become effeminate, grow unmanly % a kind of fishes, mollusks
praemollio -- to soften beforehand
commollio -- to soften
remollio -- to make soft again, soften, weaken
remollesco -- to become soft again, grow soft, soften, melt
demollio -- tr., ramollir / [fig.] affaiblir
__scit
an ordinance, statute, decree, resolution, popular vote, plebis or plebi, a decree, ordinance, resolution, a decree, ordinance % to seek to know, ask, inquire, to consult
praescitum -- a prognostic, presage, presentiment
suscito -- to lift up, raise, elevate, to cast up, swells, to stir up, rouse up, arouse, awaken, set in motion, encourage, incite, invoke, revive, rekindles, excite, invent
oscito -- see oscitans.??
oscitor -- to open the mouth wide, to gape.#
__sci
inscitia -- ignorance, inexperience, unskilfulness, awkwardness, stupidity, stolidity
__tent
to handle, touch, feel, to feel the pulse, To make trial of, try, attempt, attack, assail, To try, experiment upon, prove, test, attempt, essay, something to eat, To try, urge, incite, tempt, sound, tamper with, To disquiet, worry, excite, disturb, agitate, distress % NTLY
praetento -- N??
contento -- - tr. - contraindre, forcer.*
pertento -- To prove, try, test
portentum -- a sign, token, omen, portent, A monster, monstrosity, A marvellous fiction, extravagance, absurdity, a monster, demon#
protento -- - tr. - éprouver.
intento -- to aim, direct, wield in hostility, stretch threateningly, holding up as a threat, threaten
obtentus -- a drawing over, spreading over, sing., a cover, pretext*
obtento -- posséder [fig.]*
attento -- to strive after, to attempt, essay, try, make trial of; to solicit; to assail, attack, temptata, to seek to defile, pollute
detento -- to hold, keep back, to detain
extento -- to stretch out, extend*
retento -- to hold back firmly, keep back, hold fast, To preserve, maintain / see retempto.
__uerr
to sweep, brush, scour, sweep out, sweep together, trail, to clean up after threshing, collect, is collected, To sweep, pass over, play upon, traverse
praeuerro -- to sweep before
conuerro -- to sweep together
peruerro -- Virg. balayer avec soin.
aduerro -- advolvensque.
deuerro -- to sweep away, sweep out
diuerro -- to sweep away, sweep out
reuerro -- to sweep back again, to scatter again
exuerrae -- purifications faites dans la maison d'un mort
auerro -- to sweep away, to clear the, fishmonger's, table at a high price
euerro -- to sweep out
euerriae -- purifications faites dans la maison d'un mort
__merit
promeritum -- desert, merit
demeritum -- démérite, faute.
immeritum -- (Lebaigue P. 592 et P. 593) innocence.*
__mone
to remind, put in mind, impress upon, bring to recollection:
re.com.moneo -- to remind again
__ueni
to come upon, find, meet with, light upon
re.din.uenio -- to find again
ad.in.uenio -- to find out, to devise, adinventus
__excus
to excuse, make an excuse for, pleads as his excuse, apologies, To excuse, apologize for, To allege in excuse, plead, excuse oneself with, To decline, refuse, excuse the refusal of, to be relieved of
subexcuso -- to excuse in part
__grunn
to grunt.
suggrunnio -- to grunt a little
degrunnio -- to grunt out, do his grunting
digrunnio -- ඉ㤨ඉ燘ẻ耀??
__cub
to lie down, recline, To lie asleep, sleep, To recline at table, To lie sick, be sick, to slope % a mass, quantity
supercubo -- to lie, sleep upon
concubia -- concubia nox, the time of the first sleep in the night
concubium -- early night/first sleep/bedtime; sexual intercourse;
concuba -- concubine
concubo -- present, perf.
subcubo -- to lie under
procubo -- to lie stretched out, to lie along
succuba -- One who lies under;, a lecher, strumpet
excubiae -- a lying out on guard, watching, keeping watch, A watch, watchmen
excubo -- to lie out of doors, camp out
incubus -- the nightmare, incubus*
incubo -- to lie upon, rest on
incuba -- possesseur illégitime, usurpateur.
recubo -- to lie upon the back, lie down, lie back, recline
accubo -- to lie at, lie beside, stands near, recline
decubo -- to lie away from, out of
occubo -- to lie low, lie prostrate, lie dead
secubo -- to lie apart, sleep alone, live alone
__fet
v. fetus, a, um. % to stink; to have a bad/offensive smell/odor; % a bringing forth, bearing, hatching, producing, Young, offspring, progeny, brood, fawn, the German brood, Fruit, produce, growth, production % to become stinking % 1 - intr. - faire des petits, pondre. 2 - tr. - féconder (en parl. d'un mâle). % v. fetus.
superfeto -- to conceive anew while still with young, to superfetate
effeto -- to put out of use, to abolish, ante med.
defetisco -- int., c. defetiscor ??
__for
an open space, public place, court, market-place, A market-place, market, enclosure for selling, exchange, had many market-places to visit, the cattle-market, the vegetable-market, the fish-market, to act for your advantage, A market-place, forum, public square, exchange, all the people, an open space between the Capitoline and Palatine hills, surrounded by porticos and shops, pick up in the street, was compelled to avoid, engaged in public affairs, affairs of state, the courts, hold court, that court-district, jurisdiction, in trade, he would have been bankrupt, become bankrupt, propr, a markettown in Latium, on the, a small town on the % a gangway, A row of seats, A cell % a door, gate;, the two leaves of a door % a gangway % - intr. - aller à la selle. % to bore, pierce % the flux
superforo -- to bore from above
transforo -- to pierce through
perforo -- to bore through, pierce through, perforate
conforio -- to pollute, defile#
efforo -- to bore through, perforate
inforo -- -I. to bore into -II. to accuse in a court of justice*
__pet
to strive for, seek, aim at, repair to, make for, travel to, take refuge in, fly to, visited by the Greeks, turns to, rises to, To fall upon, rush at, attack, assault, assail, fly at, aim at, thrust at, aim at, aim at, throw an apple at, stoning, to attack, assail, To demand, exact, require, exact satisfaction.&mdash;To demand at law, sue for, claim, the defendant . . . the plaintiff, To beg, beseech, ask, request, desire, entreat, ask for Curtius, intercede with you for, to solicit, be a candidate, To woo, court, solicit, To pursue, seek, strive after, aim at, over, To fetch, bring, elicit, obtain, wrest, draw, To take, betake oneself to, repair to, take another route, betake themselves to flight, To refer to, relate to
superpeto -- to ask further
praepeto -- to strive diligently after
perpetuum -- the abiding, permanent, for all time, forever, in perpetuity, constantly
suppeto -- to be at hand, be in store, be present, be available, may be exposed to, To be equal to, be sufficient for, suffice, avail, corresponds
competo -- to coincide with, happen at the same time:
competum -- c. compitum.??
dispeto -- demander instamment
repeto -- to fall upon again, attack anew, strike again
adpeto -- one who is covetous;
impetus -- an attack, assault, onset, without a pause, An impulse, rapid motion, impetus, impetuosity, violence, fury, rush, vehemence, vigor, force, rapid motion, in the night, impulse, vehemence, ardor, passion, I feel an impulse, impulses, freshness
impeto -- to rush upon, assail, attack
oppeto -- to go to meet, encounter, suffer for pride, To perish, die
depeto -- - tr. - demander avec insistance.
suppetiae -- that which comes to aid one, aid, assistance, succor*
suppetior -- to come to the aid of, assist, succor*
suppetium -- Commod. secours, aide.*
__trapet
trapetes -- an olivemill, oil-mill
trapetum -- an olive-mill, oilmill
trapetus -- an olivemill, oil-mill
__pet=pati
perpetior -- to bear steadfastly, suffer firmly, stand out, abide, endure, be patient, to brave all, will control myself so as
__ual
to be strong, be vigorous, have strength, be able, how strong, To be in health, be sound, be well, be hale, farewell, adieu, good-bye, take care of your health, politely dismissed, off with him, good-bye to him, farewell to the stage, away with those, dico, to bid farewell, say adieu, take leave, To have power, be valid, be effective, have influence, avail, prevail, be strong, succeed, is established, have no precise word, to be strong enough, be adequate, be capable, be able, have force, be effectual, avail, be applicable, extend, the effect of this was, To be of the value of, be worth, To mean, signifyimport % a pair of doorleaves, the folding-door % the leaf of a door, a folding-door; sing.
superualeo -- to surpass greatly
superualesco -- - intr. - Vulg. devenir encore plus fort.
praeualeo -- to be stronger, have superior power
praeualesco -- to become, grow very strong
conualesco -- to recover, regain health, grow strong, gain strength
inualesco -- to become strong, grow powerful
inualeo -- to be strong against, to prevail
reualesco -- to grow well again, recover
eualesco -- to grow strong
__sult
transulto -- to leap over, spring across
1300
__tend
to stretch out, spread out, extend
co.ex.tendo -- étendre jusqu'à, juger capable
__psall
to play upon a stringed instrument, sing to the cithara
compsallo -- chanter des psaumes avec
__spars
consparsum -- pâte??
__spons=spond
a betrothed woman, bride % a betrothed man, bridegroom, suitors % to betroth, affiance, espouse % a covenant, agreement, engagement, to break a pledge, proceeded to enforce the covenant
consponsa -- Vulg. la fiancée, la mariée.
desponso -- to betroth
responsum -- an answer, reply, response, brings, A professional answer, opinion, advice, response, oracle
responso -- to return, answer, re-echo, re-echo, to answer, agree, To answer, withstand, resist, defy
__solut
a state of looseness
dissolutum -- asyndeton??
__scatur
to stream, flow, gush out
exscaturio -- int., sourdre
__coctil#
very dry wood, that burns without smoke
incoctilia -- vessels overlaid, washed with metal, tinned vessels
__purig=purg
to free from what is superfluous, make clean, make pure, clean, cleanse, purify, bone, cleared the ground, To clear the body, purge, purge myself of, To clear away, remove, melts away, trim, to clear from accusation, excuse, exculpate, justify, To remove, refute, repel, justify, by disproving, remove, refute, To establish, vindicate, plead, pleading in excuse, to make atonement for, expiate, purify, atone for, lustrate
perpurigo -- to cleanse, purge thoroughly, to make quite clean.
__miss
a sending away, sending, despatching, sing, sent by, A throwing, hurling, giving a more effective blow % the mass % a prize
praemissa -- ??
promissum -- a promise, the expectations which he raises, fulfill, to break
commissor -- to hold a festive procession, to revel, make merry
commissum -- an undertaking, enterprise, A transgression, offence, fault, crime, offences, A secret, trust
permissus -- leave, permission
permissum -- a permission
summissa -- Calm passages, quiet sayings#
tramissus -- traversée / [fig.] transmission
admissum -- a voluntary fault, trespass, crime
semisso -- to fire, cauterize one half#
__torr
to dry up, parch, roast, bake, scorch, burn, consumed, roast, parches
praetorreo -- to heat beforehand
contorreo -- to dry up entirely, to parch, scorch
attorreo -- to bake, roast
detorreo -- to scorch, to burn
extorreo -- to parch up, to scorch
retorresco -- to parch, dry up, to wither
__licit
to offer a price, to bid % things that are lawful
prolicito -- ??
illicito -- verlocken
__sciss#
fente.
proscissum -- sillon du premier labour
__condit
the laid up store % to cultivate, ornament; to make pleasant, agreeable; to soften, temper
recondita -- remote, sequestered places
reconditum -- a secret place, Plur.
__can
to be gray, be hoary, grow old % to become hoary, grow gray, whiten, to grow old, was growing feeble % to sing, celebrate, chant; to crow; to recite; to play (music)/sound (horn); to foretell; % gray hairs % a kind of wild nettle % v. canesco. % corbeille.
supercano -- v. supercino
praecano -- I. To foretell, predict, prophesy II. To anticipate, i. e. prevent, destroy in advance the power of an enchantment2
succano -- to sing to, accompany
occano -- to blow into, play upon
accano -- to sing to, with
decano -- to celebrate by singing
decania -- Cas. groupe de dix moines sous le même chef.
incanesco -- to become white, turn gray, grow hoary3
recano -- To sing back, call back by singing
__act
a deed, transaction, proposition, decree, law, a register of public events, records, journal % a driving, impulse, setting in motion, with a mighty impulse, a right of way, right to drive through, a recital, delivery, expressive gestures, A part of a play, act, this crowning achievement, to see done % the sea-shore, sea-beach:
transactum -- ??
ambactus -- a vassal, dependant#
coacta -- felted cloths#
coacto -- to constrain, force
__miss
f, a pardon, remission
ab.re.missa -- Eccl. rémission.
__terr
to frighten, affright, put in fear, cause to dread, alarm, terrify, scare, dismay, apprehensive, To drive away by terror, frighten off, scare away, To deter by terror, scare, frighten % the earth, Terra, Earth, The land, by land and sea, The ground, earth, earthquakes, to the underworld, Soil, earth, ground, son of earth, water and earth, A land, country, region, territory, of the nations, to men, in all lands, on earth, in the world, in the world, the world, whole world, all nations, Plur gen, place, to whatever part of the world, where in the world % in Schrecken setzen
absterreo -- to frighten off, drive away:
proterreo -- to frighten off, scare away, drive away, affright, terrify
perterreo -- to frighten thoroughly, terrify
deterreo -- to frighten off, deter, discourage, prevent, hinder*
exterreo -- to strike with terror, frighten, affright
__plic=plac
to fold, wind, coil, coiling up % die Falte
displiceo -- to displease, be unsatisfactory, I dislike extremely, I am inclined, am discontented, was fretful
supplicium -- a kneeling, bowing down, humble entreaty, petition, supplication, An humiliation, public prayer, supplication, act of worship, votive offerings, the punishment of death, death-penalty, execution, slaughter, to take their own lives, Punishment, penalty, torture, torment, pain, distress, suffering
implicisco -- - tr. - embrouiller, troubler.#
__postic
postica -- a backdoor
posticum -- - 1 - porte de derrière, porte dérobée. - 2 - derrière d'une maison. - 3 - chambre de derrière. - 4 - latrines. - 5 - derrière, anus, fondement.
__ic=iaci
to strike, hit, smite, stab, sting, hardly stirred, by lightning, P. perf., struck, smitten, tormented, disturbed, panic-stricken, family affliction, tipsy, foedus, to make a covenant, enter into a league % to strike, hit, smite, stab, sting
intericio -- to throw between, set between, intersperse, join, intermix, to intervene with, P. pass., placed between, interposed, interspersed, inserted, intervening, intermingled, intermediate, after a short interval, after a year, after a few days, during this delay, n. as subst.
transicio -- to transfer; to transport; to pierce, transfix;
disicio -- to throw asunder, drive asunder, scatter, disperse, break up, tear to pieces, the wounded body with limbs torn off, To rout, disperse, scatter, To dash to pieces, ruin, destroy, dilapidated, to thwart, overthrow, frustrate, bring to naught
praeicio -- to cast, throw up in front
proicio -- to throw forth, cast before, throw out, throw down, throw, thrown to you, carried out to sea and threw overboard, To throw away, cast out, cast off, let go, abandon, To throw forward, hold out, extend, hold in front, was extended, reflex., to throw oneself, fall prostrate, To cast out, expel, exile, banish, to throw away, give up, yield, resign, sacrifice, reject, killed themselves, To neglect, desert, abandon, To throw, hurry, precipitate, thrust themselves, act precipitately, abandon themselves to, run riot.&mdash;To put off, delay
subicio -- to throw under, place under, cast below, discharged below, to bring, cause to be encamped, post, To set up, mount, throw up, shoots up, To substitute, forge, counterfeit, To suborn, to submit, subject, present, To ascribe, attribute, what meaning is to be attributed to it, To substitute, To place under, make subject, subject, expose, to subordinate, bring under, comprise in, to place after, let follow, affix, annex, append, subjoin, subjoins, answer, To bring forward, propose, adduce, bring to mind, prompt, suggest
subices -- underlayers, supports*
traicio -- to throw across, cause to cross, cause to go across, put over, transfer, throw over, shoot across, to cause to cross, transport, ship across, lead over, ship over, transfer, To pass through, make a way through, break through, To strike through, stab through, pierce, penetrate, transfix, transpierce, To cross, pass, go over, cross over, to transfer, cause to pass, having thrown itself, To overstep, to transpose
conicio -- To throw together, unite, collect, to draw a conclusion, conclude, infer, conjecture, guess, to prophesy, foretell, divine, interpret
reiicio -- to throw, cast, fling back
poricio -- to lay before, to offer sacrifice to the gods, between the slaying and the offering of the victim, at the last moment, at the eleventh hour
abicio -- to throw from one, cast away, throw away, throw down, has given up the fight, to many in your behalf, dash to the earth, he threw himself down as if lifeless, throw it away, to discharge, cast, throw, fling, to cast off, throw away, give up, must be got rid of, to throw off, cast aside, give up, abandon, to resign one's candidacy, I reject the technical defence, nonsense apart, To cast down, degrade, humble, lower, se, to give up in despair, To throw away, sell for a trifle, sell cheap
coicio -- - to throw/put/pile together; to conclude, infer, guess; to assign, make go; classify, - to throw/cast/fling (into area); to devote/pour (money); to thrust, involve; to insert;
deicio -- to throw down, hurl down, precipitate, prostrate, raze, fell, cut down, tear down, destroy, leap, leap over, to destroy, to tear down, to cast, shed, to be thrown off one's balance, lose one's head.&mdash;To drive out, dislodge, expel, To drive out, turn out of possession, eject, dispossess, to be driven out of, course, To lay low, strike down, kill, slay, slaughter, crush, To lower, let fall, de, press, to cast down, with downcast eyes, To remove, avert, divert, turn away, repel, To prevent from obtaining, deprive, rob of, after his fall, to defeat, disappoint, prevent the choice of
eiicio -- to cast/throw/fling/drive out/up, extract, expel, discharge, vomit; to out (tongue);
enico -- LY ??
inicio -- to throw in, put in, hurl upon, put on, cast on, set into, bury, To form by throwing, heap up, build, To insert, build in, To put on, throw over, impose, apply, attack, falling over, to lay hands on, seize, take possession of, checks, to bring into, inspire, suggest, impress, infuse, occasion, cause, furnish, given, dwelling on.&mdash;To throw out a hint, mention, suggest
obicio -- to throw before, throw to, cast, offer, present, expose, presented, be exposed.&mdash;To throw before, use as a defence, cast in the way, set against, oppose, flung himself before the chariot, to throw before, put before, present, offer, give up, expose, hold up as an example, abandon, To bring upon, inspire, inflict, visit, suggested, to be occasioned, befall, happen, occur, To throw out against, object, taunt, reproach, upbraid with, to make such an attack on
reicio -- to throw back, fling back, hurl back, throw over the back, stretch on the ground, to push back, fling away, averts, drive back, throw to the rear, into his arms, To force back, beat back, repel, repulse, to be driven back, to drive back, drive away, cast off, remove, repel, reject, To reject contemptuously, refuse, scorn, disdain, despise, when the appeal was overruled, P. n, s&lt;*&gt;bst., evils to be rejected, to set aside, challenge peremptorily, reject, right of challenge, to refer, direct, assign, transfer, to refer, turn over, referred, to defer, postpone
exico -- to cut out, away.
oica -- a precious stone#
__im=em
to buy, purchase, cheap, dear, for the public, on credit, to buy, buy up, purchase, pay for, gain, acquire, procure, obtain, to bribe % to pass through, traverse
interimo -- to take from the midst, take away, do away with, abolish, To destroy, slay, kill, To distress intolerably, afflict
perimo -- to take away entirely, annihilate, extinguish, destroy, cut off, hinder, prevent, disappeared, destroyed, To kill, slay
__em
coemo -- to purchase, buy up, forestall
abemo -- tr., emporter
__ueter
to grow old, wear out % int., c. veterasco % to make old, P. a. % the old booths on the south side of the Forum Romanum
inueterasco -- to grow old, become fixed, be established, continue long
inueteresco -- Inscr. c. inveterasco.
inuetero -- to make old, give age to, to grow old, become rooted
__lect
a couch, bed, lounge, sofa, be confined, too short, bier, A bridal bed, marriage, A couch at meals, diningcouch % to be punished, suffer punishment, be beaten, suffer through negligence.&mdash;To be blamed, incur censure
prolecto -- to allure, entice forth, lead on
collecta -- A contribution in money*
collectum -- that which is collected*
collectus -- a collection;*
sublecto -- to wheedle, cajole
delecto -- to allure, attract, delight, charm, please, entertain, interest
delectus -- see dilectus
delector -- to delight, charm
oblecto -- to delight, divert, entertain, amuse, interest, he is my delight, to be entertained, to spend agreeably, fill pleasantly, To delay, detain, occupy
dilectus -- a choosing, picking out, selecting, selection, choice, distinction, indiscriminately, A levy, recruiting, enrollment, conscription, draft
illecto -- to allure, attract, invite
adlectus -- P. a. Subst.@
electa -- selections*
electo -- -I. to get out artfully, worm out -II. to choose, select*
__scen
In a theatre, the stage, boards, scene
proscenium -- The place before the scene where the actors appeared, the proscenium
obscena -- immodest, impure, indecent, lewd, obscene.*
1400
__sens
a perceiving, observation, accept a proof from your own experience, A power of perceiving, perception, feeling, sensation, sense, consciousness, A sense, special sense, Feeling, sentiment, emotion, inclination, disposition, An opinion, thought, sense, view, notion, A habit of mind, mode of thinking, notion, taste, communis, a general mode of thinking, prevailing notion, common insight, common sense, from the usual lines of thought, Consciousness, sense, understanding, Sense, idea, meaning, signification % perceptions, ideas
consensus -- agreement, accordance, unanimity, concord, as you all agree, unanimously, beset with demands for, has become a general custom, with one accord, A plot, conspiracy, Agreement, harmony
adsensus -- an agreement, assent, approval, approbation, fulfil their duty by assent, An acceptance as real, an echo
__tact
a touching, touch, handling, The sense of feeling, feeling, touch, influence, effect, operation
contactus -- a touching, touch, contact, effectual, A contagion, infection
attactus -- a touching, touch, abl. sing.
__uict
that which sustains life, means of living, sustenance, nourishment, provisions, victuals, despised the diet, A way of life, mode of living, stage of civilization
conuictus -- a living together, intimacy, social intercourse, A banquet, feast, the talk of every dinner
__stert
to snore;
sestertius -- sesterce; [semis-tertius => 2 1/2 assses, small silver coin];#
sestertium -- as a measure of dimension, two and a half feet deep
desterto -- to cease snoring;, to cease dreaming
resterto -- - intr. - Pelag. faire entendre un ronflement.
__peri%
experience, practical knowledge, skill % - intr. - Plaut. mourir, périr, se perdre.
imperitia -- inexperience, ignorance, awkwardness, in lemm.
__per=paro
imperito -- to command, govern, rule, be supreme, my decree is just
__coll
the neck: % to wash thoroughly, wash out, rinse, aliquid, aliquid aliquā re;, aliquid de aliquā re, to moisten, wet, to quench thirst % arch. pour collum
succollo -- to lift/carry on one's shoulders;
decollo -- to behead, cause to be beheaded; to remove from the neck (according to Nonius); to rob;
__leg
to gather together, collect again
ab.re.lego -- - tr. - éloigner, écarter, reléguer.
__ten=tene
In the Circensian games, a car which bore the images of the gods, chariot for the gods
abstensus -- action de s'abstenir de.
obtensus -- a pretext#
__cub
to lie down often, be accustomed to lie % the elbow, lean upon, jogs, The arm, a forearm, ell, cubit % state/action of reclining/lying down/taking rest; bed, couch;
accubito -- - intr. - se coucher pour manger.
accubitum -- a couch for a large number of guests to recline on at meals
incubito -- to lie in, upon
secubito -- - intr. - faire lit à part.
__ed
to eat away, gnaw at, consume:
amb.ad.edo -- to eat, gnaw around, to eat up entirely
__fix
antefixa -- the little ornaments, images, statues, affixed to the roofs and gutters of houses, temples
adfixa -- the appendages, appurtenances belonging to a possession
__pren
to grasp, seize, catch, lay hold of, To take hold of, catch, hold, check, detain, stop, To sue for office, canvass, is a candidate, solicit
apprenso -- to seize, with eagerness;, to catch, snuff up
deprensa -- a species of military punishment, more severe than, but milder than
__lact
To suck milk, to be a suckling; to contain milk % a kind of cassia % milk % the intestines;, the smaller intestines, chitterlings % to turn to milk % to give milk, give suck, P. praes.
collactea -- a foster-sister*
collacteus -- a foster-brother, foster-sister; masc., fem.*
ablacto -- to wean
adlacto -- - tr. - allaiter.
elactesco -- - intr. - Plin. perdre sa sève.
__luct
to wrestle, To wrestle, struggle, strive, contend, to struggle, strive, contend, after a, struggle % sorrow, mourning, grief, affliction, distress, lamentation, Signs of sorrow, mourning, mourning apparel, weeds, A source of grief, affliction, Grief % a wrestling, wrestling-match % to wrestle, struggle
colluctor -- to struggle, contend, wrestle with, cum aliquo, alicui.
adluctor -- to struggle with, against
delucto -- to wrestle, struggle
deluctor -- to wrestle, to struggle, combat
obluctor -- to struggle against, contend with, oppose
relucto -- - intr. - Apul. c. reluctor.
reluctor -- to struggle against, resist, make opposition
illuctor -- mit - etwas kämpfen
eluctor -- to struggle out, force a way out
__mixt=misc
commixtum -- mélange.
__pact=ping
an agreement, covenant, contract, stipulation, compact, pact, A marriage-contract, a manner, way, means, how, thereby % a betrothed woman, bride
compactum -- an agreement, sing., according to agreement, by concert
epactae -- intercalary days
__perc=parc
a kind of fish, a perch % c. percio. % to move, rouse greatly, to stir up, excite.
comperco -- to save, hoard, lay up
deperco -- - tr. - épargner, ménager.
imperco -- to spare
reperco -- to be sparing with, to spare, to refrain, abstain from, if they in no way refrain from doing, believing, this
__prec
to ask, beg, entreat, pray, supplicate, request, call upon, beseech, sue, to the prayers of Prusias, at whose altars, To wish for, invoke upon, wish, uttered curses % 1 - prières, supplications, instances. 2 - voeux, souhaits de bonne année. 3 - prières (adressées aux dieux). 4 - imprécations. % a kind of grape-vine % - tr. - prier. % 
comprecor -- to pray to, supplicate, implore:
deprecor -- to avert by prayer, deprecate, plead against, beg to escape, seek to avoid
adprecor -- to pray to, worship
imprecor -- to call down upon, imprecate
__putr
to be rotten, putrid
computresco -- to become wholly putrid, to putrefy, rot
imputresco -- to rot, putrefy in
exputresco -- - intr. - pourrir, tomber en putréfaction, se corrompre, se gâter.
__clus=clud
- 1 - lieu fermé, enclos, clos. - 2 - fermeture.
conclusum -- a conclusion, inference
recluso -- wieder öffnen
__cret=cern
decretum -- a decree, decision, ordinance, vote, resolution, in pursuance of, A resolve, determination, plan, A principle, doctrine, dogma
__cret
Cretan earth, pipe - clay, chalk, turbulent, with a mark of approval
concretum -- hardness, solid matter, Hard frost, stiff frost
secretum -- a hidden thing, mystery, secret, mysteries, that mysterious being, A hidden place, hiding-place, retirement, solitude, retreat, in solitude*
excreta -- criblures.
increto -- to chalk, whiten with chalk
__deps
to knead; to dress, to curry
condepso -- to knead together
perdepso -- to knead, work over
__dorm
to sleep, rest; to be/fall asleep; to behave as if asleep; to be idle, do nothing; % to fall asleep
condormio -- to fall quite asleep, Cu.
condormisco -- to go entirely to sleep, to fall asleep;, perf.
perdormisco -- to sleep on
obdormisco -- to fall asleep; to go to sleep; (w/reference to death);
obdormio -- to fall asleep
addormio -- to begin to sleep, to go to sleep
addormisco -- to go to sleep
indormio -- to fall asleep on, sleep upon
indormisco -- - intr. - Aug. s'endormir.
edormio -- to sleep out, sleep off
edormisco -- to sleep out, sleep off
__fict=fac
a deception, falsehood, fiction, pretences
conficto -- to counterfeit, feign
__frac
- intr. - devenir répugnant. % grounds, dregs of oil % to become soft, mellow, to rot, spoil
confracesco -- int., pourrir entièrement
__sarr
to hoe, to weed
consarrio -- to hoe, rake to pieces
resarrio -- to hoe again
__sect=seq
a beaten way, pathway, mode, manner, method, principle, mode of life.&mdash;A body of political principles, party, side, his party, a doctrine, school, sect
consecto -- c. consector.??
consector -- to follow eagerly, attend continually, go after:
persector -- to follow, pursue eagerly, to investigate
prosecta -- entrailles de la victime.#
prosectum -- v. prosecta??
dissecto -- fréq. de disseco??
adsector -- to wait upon, follow;
insecta -- Plin. insectes.*
insecto -- to pursue, pass., pursued
insector -- to pursue, follow up, extirpate, to pursue, attack, rail at, inveigh against, lecture
insectum -- an insect; plur.*
__sept=saept
c. saepta % CE
consepto -- to fence round, hedge in, enclose
conseptum -- enclos, enceinte, parc.
disseptum -- c. disseptio.
proseptum -- domaine, enclos
__sess
a sitting
consessus -- a collection, assembly
subsessa -- an ambush, ambuscade, med.*
assessus -- a sitting by
__sput
to spit, spit out, that disease before which one spits, the epilepsy % spit, spittle; sing.. % a spitting
consputo -- to spit upon, insult grossly
consputum -- crachat.
desputum -- spittle
insputo -- to spit upon
__rept=rep
to creep, crawl % vêtement fait de peaux de bêtes.
correpto -- to creep
1500
perrepto -- to creep over, crawl through
subreptum --?? 
surreptum -- ??
irrepto -- to creep into, to, to creep, crawl upon
obrepto -- to steal on unawares, to come on imperceptibly
erepto -- tr., fréq. de erepo, gravir péniblement (une pente)
__flocc
a lock, flock, to value a hair, regard as worthless, care not a straw for % dregs, less of wine
deflocco -- tr., dégarnir de son poil??
__glutt
to swallow, gulp down
degluttio -- to swallow down
ingluttio -- - tr. - engloutir, avaler.
__disser
to examine, argue, discuss, speak, harangue, discourse, treat
edissero -- to set forth in full, relate at length, dwell upon, unfold, explain, tell
__ed
to eat up, eat, consume, devour: % a glutton, gormandizer
ex.com.edo -- to eat up, consume
__haust
a drawing, the right of drawing.&mdash;A drinking, swallowing, drawing in, drink, draught, in small draughts, stream, breath, a handful, to imitate
exhausto -- fréq. de exhaurio
__peiur=iur
to swear falsely, perjure oneself, a false &lt;*&gt;ath, offended by perjury
ex.pe.iuro -- to swear falsely, perjure one's self
__sumpt=sum2
outlay, expense, cost, charge, no expense is lavished us, support themselves % mineure d'un syllogisme. % poignée, pincée, prise
exsumptuo -- - tr. - Gloss. rendre pauvre.
insumptum -- expense
assumptus -- part. passé de assumo. - 1 - pris, emprunté, tiré du dehors. - 2 - qu'on s'est attribué. - 3 - ajouté, adjoint.
__super
to go over, rise above, overtop, surmount, transcend, To go over, rise above, mount, ascend, surmount, overtop, passing over the summit, traverse, go beyond, To sail by, pass, double, weather, To exceed, be in excess, overrun, be abundant, abound, had been too much for, To be left over, remain, survive, survive, to be victorious, overcome, subdue, conquer, vanquish, To extend beyond, to have the upper hand, be superior, excel, overcome, surpass, exulting, To surpass, excel, exceed, outdo, outstrip, transcend, will outstrip. &mdash;To master, overcome, suppress, defeat, subdue, surmount, to which not even the gods are superior % The heavenly bodies
exsupero -- to mount up, tower
exsupera -- sorte de verveine??
insupero -- to pass over, surpass;, to conquer
__polit
the State, Constitution (a work of Plato)
impolitia -- want of neatness, carelessness, negligence
impolities -- manque de culture.
__asser
to plant/set at/near;
inassero -- to cover with beams
__finit=fin
infinitum -- -I. boundless space, the infinite -II. an infinitude, an endless amount, number, to infinity, without end
__frend
I. Neutr., to gnash the teeth II. Act., To crush, bruise, or grind to pieces;To lament over with rage, gnash the teeth at % to begin to gnash % to gnash, gnash the teeth, P. praes
infrendeo -- - intr. - 1 - grincer (des dents). - 2 - Tert. être furieux (contre qqn, alicui).
infrendo -- to gnash
__gemit=gem
a sighing, sigh, groan, lamentation, complaint, Pain, sorrow, a groan, hoarse sound
ingemitus -- a groan
__oboed
to give ear, hearken, listen, To obey, yield obedience, be subject, serve, impers.
inoboedio -- to disobey, be disobedient
__audit=aud
the hearing, sense of hearing, A hearing, listening % (Lebaigue P. 122 et P. 123) ce qu'on a entendu, ouï-dire, on-dit, nouvelle.
obauditus -- a listening
__ligur
to lick. % -I. a kind of precious stone -II. a gem
obligurio -- to devour, consume, squander
abligurio -- To lick away, waste, spend in luxurious indulgence, obligaverunt
__sonit=son
a noise, sound, din, thunder, the thunders of my speech % to make a noise
obsonito -- to feast, entertain*
__percul=aper
operculo -- to furnish, cover with a lid, to cover
__cens
to tax, assess, rate, estimate: % a registering of citizens and property by the censors, census, appraisement, to exclude from the list of citizens.&mdash;A counting, numbering, The register of the census, censor's lists. &mdash;A fortune, estate, wealth, riches, property, possessions, his fortune, beyond your means, rich presents, gifts % -I. wealth, riches -II. to value, estimate, rate.
percenseo -- to count over, reckon up, enumerate
succenseo -- s??
recenseo -- to count, enumerate, number, reckon, survey
accenseo -- to reckon to, count among (rare):
accensi -- unarmed supernumeraries of a legion, ready to fill vacancies:#
__cens=cand 
incensum -- A setting fire to, lighting
incenso -- tr., brûler (de l'encens)
__foss
a dilch, trench, fosse, A river-bed, water-course, A gutter, water-way, A furrow % to dig, pierce
perfosso -- to dig through
confosso -- tr., amonceler en tas
__horr
to stand on end, stand erect, bristle, be rough, To shake, tremble, shiver, To tremble, shudder, quake, shudder at, tremble at, be afraid of, dread, am deeply moved, to loathe, To be frightful, be terrible, be desolate % to rise on end, stand erect, bristle up, grow rough, To begin to shake, shudder, tremble, be terrified, fear, dread % a storehouse, barn, granary, magazine, cellar
perhorreo -- to shudder at
perhorresco -- to bristle up, roughen
subhorresco -- to become rough, stormy, to boil up
abhorreo -- to shrink back from, have an aversion for, shudder at, abhor:
abhorresco -- frémir d'effroi, frissonner de crainte.
cohorresco -- to shudder, shiver
adhorreo -- inhorreo.??
exhorreo -- to tremble before, shudder at, dread
exhorresco -- to tremble, shudder, be terrified, dread
inhorreo -- to stand erect, bristle
inhorresco -- to stand erect, bristle up, rise in points, roughen, ruffle
obhorreo -- to bristle with
obhorresco -- - intr. - Itala. s'effrayer à la vue de.
__uolg
common people/general public/multitude/common herd/rabble/crowd/mob; flock; % to spread around/among the multitude; to publish, divulge, circulate; to prostitute
peruolgo -- to make common, make public, spread abroad
prouolgo -- to make publicly known, to publish, divulge
inuolgo -- to bring before the public, to publish, make known, Absol.
euolgo -- to make commonly known, divulge
__apt
to adapt, fit, apply, adjust, for wielding, To accommodate, adapt, be celebrated in, To make ready, prepare, in the woods
praeapto -- tr., arranger préalablement
adapto -- to adjust, modify; to fit (to) (w/DAT);
coapto -- to fit, join, adjust together with something
exapto -- to fit, adjust
__aud
to venture, dare, be bold, dare to do, risk, desperate measures, him who dared so much, in dealing with tribunes, now for a daring deed, have the resolution, to be eager for battle % to hear, your account of yourself, listen, do you hear?, Supin. acc., Supin. abl., P. pass., already known by report, hearsay, what he had heard, To listen to, give attention to, To hear, be taught by, learn from, must examine the charge, entertained proposals, investigate, To listen to, lend an ear, regard, hear, grant, To hear with assent, accept, agree with, approve, yield to, grant, allow, I would assent to it, if, granted, I do not admit it.&mdash;To obey, heed, to obey, To be called, be named, reported, regarded, to bear that name, to be praised, you will be in bad repute, to be injured in reputation
praeaudio -- to hear beforehand
subaudio -- to understand, supply a word; to hear a little;*
exaudio -- to hear clearly, distinguish, discern, hear
adaudio -- - tr. - Schol. Pers. ajouter par la pensée.
anaudia -- loss of speech, dumbness
inaudio -- to hear whispered, get an inkling of
obaudio -- to obey, absol.
reaudio -- - tr. - Gloss. entendre un son répercuté.
__doc
to cause to know, make aware, teach, instruct, inform, show, prove, convince, tell, had shown, describes, proved, to teach, rehearse, produce, exhibit, To be a teacher, give instruction
praedoceo -- to teach, instruct, inform beforehand
condoceo -- to exercise, train, instruct, Mi., Co.
perdoceo -- to teach thoroughly, instruct well
subdoceo -- to teach as a deputy school-master
addoceo -- to teach in addition (once):
dedoceo -- to cause to unlearn, unteach, teach the opposite of
edoceo -- to teach thoroughly, instruct, inform, apprise
__dom
to domesticate, tame, break, subdue, master, To subdue, vanquish, overcome, conquer, reduce, destroy, press, boil soft % a house, dwelling-house, building, mansion, palace, A home, dwelling, abode, residence, a building, edifice, structure, abode, the Labyrinth, grotto, caves, site, bodies, A household, family, house, at home, in the house, domo, home, homewards, to the house, from home, out of the house, a native country, own city, home, abode, in war and peace, at home and in the field, at hand
praedomo -- to tame, subdue beforehand, mastered, surmounted beforehand
perdomo -- to tame thoroughly, subdue, subjugate, conquer, vanquish, overcome
subdomo -- to subject by taming, to tame, subdue
condomo -- to tame completely, to curb, check;
edomo -- to conquer, subdue*
__pot
to drink, to drink up, suck in, absorb, To drink, tope, tipple % to become master of, take possession of, get, obtain, acquire, receive, usurp supreme authority, To be master of, have, hold, possess, occupy, was supreme, reach, have climbed % a drinking, A drink, draught
praepoto -- - 1 - boire auparavant. - 2 - faire boire auparavant, donner à boire (à qqn qqch, aliquem aliqua re).
compotio -- to make partaker of
compotior -- - intr. - être en possession de, jouir de.
perpotior -- to get entire possession of, to hold, enjoy completely
perpoto -- to keep drinking, tipple, carouse
depotior -- perdre, être privé de.
depoto -- tr., = potare
repotia -- an after-drinking, festival on the day after a wedding
epoto -- to drink down/up, quaff, drain; to absorb; to swallow/suck up; to empty (vessel); to engulf;
__rup
a rock, a cliff
praerupium -- escarpement
derupio -- to tear off, tear away, snatch away, remove violently; to pull down#
__tim
to fear, be afraid, be fearful, be apprehensive, be afraid of, dread, apprehend, for you, a thief for his cabbages, I am afraid you cannot stand it, To show fear, express terror, expressed its fear, fluttered % s'effrayer.
praetimeo -- to fear beforehand, to be in fear, be afraid
pertimesco -- to be frightened, be alarmed, fear greatly
pertimeo -- to fear greatly, to be very timid
subtimeo -- to be secretly afraid
extimesco -- to be greatly afraid, fear greatly, await with fear, dread
extimo -- - tr. - 1 - croire, penser. 2 - reléguer à une extrémité.
intimo -- to, put, bring into
1600
intima -- the inmost parts#
__uid
to see, discern, perceive, awake, to experience, To see, look at, observe, note, see what I have done!, is not this creditable?, look at me, take courage from me, To perceive, observe, hear, to be looked upon, be regarded, seem, appear, to appear, be decided, be adjudged, to see, perceive, mark, observe, discern, understand, comprehend, be aware, sees through, to have had more insight, that I had seen further, To look at, attend to, consider, think, reflect upon, take note of, let him see to that, To look out for, see to, care for, provide, take care, make sure, To see, reach, experience, attain, obtain, enjoy, may live to see, To see patiently, bear, permit, To see, go to see, visit, it seems proper, seems right, seems good, M, A, as you will, if he pleased % to deprive, bereave, widowed % être vu, sembler, paraître, avoir l'air de, croire, penser. % an unmarried woman, A widow
praeuideo -- to see first, see beforehand, foresee
prouideo -- to see in advance, discern, descry
peruideo -- to look over, look on, overlook, survey.
diuido -- to divide, force asunder, part, gave two days to, part, is set in gold, To divide, distribute, apportion, share, appropriated, To break up, scatter, destroy, To separate, divide, part, remove, keeps away, to part, divide, distribute, apportion, arrange, sing by turns, to divide the question, regulated, To separate, distinguish*
inuideo -- to look askance at, cast an evil eye upon
inuidia -- envy, grudge, jealousy, ill-will, prejudice, ungrudgingly, Envy, Envy, ill-will, odium, unpopularity, to incur, to be hated, will bring me intolerable hate, unpopularity, be it said without boasting, envy, an envious man, will reluctantly confess, A cause of envy, of lands whether desirable or pestilential, why is it odious
reuideo -- to see again, go to see again
auideo -- [avec inf.] oser / être insatiable
auido -- - intr. - Gloss. être avide.#
euideor -- to appear completely, plainly
__tect
a covered structure, roofed enclosure, shelter, house, dwelling, abode, roof, the buildings scattered through the gardens, in prison, of the Labyrinth, A covering, roof, A ceiling, A canopy
protectum -- the projecting part of a roof, the eaves
__empt=em
a purchase, contract of purchase, in buying and selling %  % Inscr. achat.
redempto -- to ransom, redeem
__lenit#
mildness, gentleness
selenitium -- a kind of ivy
__iuu
to help, assist, aid, support, further, sustain:
sub.ad.iuua -- an assistant
co.ad.iuuo -- tr., assister
__mers=merg
to dip, immerse, plunge into
submerso -- - tr. - submerger complètement, engloutir.
submersus -- part. passé de submergo. - a - submergé, immergé, englouti, coulé à fond. - b - étouffé, plongé dans les ténèbres.
demerso -- fréq. de demergo
__salt
to dance, to speak jerkingly, speak in short clauses, dancing a girl's part, recited with rhythmical movements % a leaping, leap, spring, bound, sing, make a leap / a forest, woodland, untilled mountain land, forest-pasture, woodland-pasture, thicket, jungle
subsalto -- - intr. - Hier. sauter en approchant.
desalto -- to dance through, to represent by dancing, med.
__mer
emereo -- to obtain by service, earn, merit, deserve
emereor -- achever le service militaire
__neru
eneruo -- to enervate, weaken, make effeminate, deprive of vigor
__post__
posteri -- inferior
postero -- to be behind, later, to come after, to be inferior to, to want, to come short of
__er
to cast forth, throw out, root up, dig out, take % the master of a house, head of a family, A master, lord, owner, proprietor, husband, the gods % the mistress of a house, mistress, lady, A mistress, ruler, A sweetheart % a pulse, bitter vetch
transero -- I. To pass or thrust through II. To transfer by grafting, to ingraft
suberies -- c. suber.#
exero -- to stretch forth; to thrust out (of land); to put out (plant); to lay bare, uncover (body);
coero -- c. curo.#
suera -- viande de porc.#
aereum -- a copper color#
aera -- -I. a weed among grain; darnel, tare, or cockle -II. counters; hence also the items of a computed sum#
aero -- - tr. - garnir d'airain.??
__expet=pet
to seek after, strive for aim at, demand, ask
ad.ex.peto -- 
__uol
to fly at, rush upon % to roll, roll upon
ad.in.uoluo -- 
__opert#
to cover % chose cachée, secrète / les Mystères de la Bonne Déesse
adopertum -- that which is mysterious, a mystery
__cit
to call out, summon forth, bring out, wake, rouse, summon, To raise, stir up, To raise, erect, build, construct, produce, kindle, are produced, to raise up, comfort, arouse, awaken, excite, incite, stimulate, enliven, inspire, startles, the strongest incentive to virtue, To appeal to, call upon, cite, To found, cause, occasion, excite, kindle
co.ex.cito -- tr., réveiller ensemble
__mens
a table, wait at table, fishmonger's board, A table, meal, course, supper, at a single meal, an after-feast, thank-offering, dessert, meal-time, A money-changer's counter, a public bank.&mdash;A sacrificial table, alter % a measuring, measure
commensor -- to hold a festive procession, to revel, make merry;, Absol.*
demensum -- an allowance, ration
__mess=mens
commessor -- to hold a festive procession, to revel, make merry;, Absol.*
__cand
to be brilliant, be glittering, shine, glitter, glisten, to glow, be hot % to become bright, grow white, begin to glisten, To begin to glow, grow red hot
concandeo -- - intr. - être embrasé.
concandesco -- to glow, be inflamed
excandesco -- to grow hot, kindle
excandeo -- Act., to make bright, whiten
incandesco -- to grow warm, be heated, glow, kindle
recandesco -- to grow white again, whiten
__nutr
to suckle, nourish, feed, foster, bring up, rear, To nourish, support, maintain, foster, To nourish, nurse, take care of, attend to, to nourish, cherish, support, cultivate, sustain, maintain, treat mildly, feed % to cherish, cultivate
connutrio -- nourrir ensemble ou avec
adnutrio -- to nourish, train up at or near to
annutrio -- to nourish, train up at or near to
innutrio -- to nourish, bring up in
renutrio -- to nourish again
__tort
a twisted loaf, a twist % to torture, torment % a cord, rope
contorta -- passages véhéments
__tuns
contunsum -- to break, lessen, weaken, destroy, subdue, put down, baffle, check
__minu
smallness, fineness; minuteness; pettiness; %  % The little
exminutuo -- rendre pauvre
__mora
immoratus -- influence prolongée
__ciuil
inciuilia -- impolite acts, rudeness
__deb
what is owing, a debt, pay the debt to nature, die, receive as my due
indebitum -- that which is not due, the performance, payment of which is not due
__rect
good, uprightness, rectitude, virtue
porrectum -- 
directum -- a straight line
__mad
to be wet, be moist, drip, flow, To be boiled, be sodden, To be full, overflow, abound % to become moist, be wet
praemadeo -- int., être très humecté, ivre
commadeo -- to become very soft
permadesco -- to become thoroughly wet, quite moist.
demadesco -- to become wet, be moistened
dimadesco -- to melt away*
immadesco -- to become wet
__pud
to be ashamed, feel shame, to make ashamed, put to shame, humiliate, why should I be ashamed?, before gods and men, I am ashamed before my father of my deeds, supin. abl.
praepudium -- v. praeputium
dispudet -- it shames, is shameful
perpudesco -- to feel great shame
suppudet -- to be somewhat ashamed
propudium -- a shameful act, a scandal, a vile wretch
repudio -- to cast off, put away, reject, To reject, refuse, scorn, disdain, repudiate, would scout, deprive the state of*
repudium -- a putting away, dissolution of marriage, divorce
depudesco -- to become shameless
depudet -- to cease to shame
__petit
to apply, solicit for an office, to be a candidate for office
appetitus -- An onset, attack, assault
__plaus=plaud
a clapping, flapping, noise from striking, A clapping of hands in approval, applause
applausus -- part. passé de applaudo.
__mer
to deserve, merit, be entitled to, be worthy of, no kindness has been deserved, as he deserves, dead, To earn, acquire, gain, obtain, served as a soldier, incur, To get by purchase, buy, purchase, what price do you think they would take?&mdash;To serve for pay, serve as a soldier, serve in the cavalry, serve in the infantry, To confer a favor, render service % to deserve, merit, be entitled to, if I deserve it: Pa, Da, serve in the army, To deserve well, be meritorious, after deserving so well, To deserve a return, merit recompense, behave, treated me as I desired, deserving this reception, to serve well, have treated better, act ruinously, has treated me % unmixed wine, wine without water, given to
commereo -- to merit fully, deserve, incur, earn:
commereor -- to commit, be guilty of:*
promereo -- to deserve, be deserving of, merit
promereor -- to deserve, merit, earn, be worthy
permereo -- to go through service, to serve out
demereo -- to deserve well of
demereor -- to deserve well of, lay under obligation
__cit
concito -- to put in quick motion, rouse, excite, urge, drive, incite, spur, agitate, disturb, brandishes, to flee headlong, to rouse, urge, impel, move, influence, stir, instigate, goad, stimulate, To rouse, excite, cause, occasion, produce, stir up
discito -- - tr. - apprendre, se mettre au courant de.
percito -- to excite thoroughly, strongly, vehemently*
procito -- tr., appeler hors, faire sortir*
incito -- to enrage; to urge on; to inspire; to arouse;
incita -- to bring to a stand-still, reduce to extremity: Sy., Mi.
incitae -- c. incita.
recito -- to read out, read aloud, recite, declaim, rehearse
accitus -- a summons, call, sing., at his summons
accito -- - tr. - faire venir.
decito -- schnell herabgleiten lassen
__cup
to long for, desire, wish, is possessed by a master-passion, your wishes are mine, To be well disposed, be favorable, favor, wish well, be interested for, causā, to be at the service of, be devoted to, be zealous for, to whom I am wholly devoted % a cask, tun, barrel % to wish, desire
concupisco -- to long for, be very desirous of, covet, aspire to, strive after
concupio -- to be very desirous, to long much for;, verb finit.
percupio -- to desire earnestly
discupio -- to desire greatly, long
occupo -- to take into possession, seize, occupy, master, win, chieftains were aiming at, clasps, To occupy, cover, take up, fill, To fall upon, attack, strikes, the face, fetters while prostrate, surprise, To get the start of, be before-hand with, anticipate, do first, outstrip, begin the war first, To hinder, to seize, take possession of, fill, invade, overspread, engross, are darkened, To gain, win, acquire, pass for reserved, To take up, fill, occupy, employ, invested at high interest
1700
__fid
to trust, confide, put confidence in, rely upon % trust, faith, confidence, reliance, credence, belief, find acceptance, as soon as they can trust, commands belief, may be believed, give credence, evince, credit, entire resources, trustworthiness, faithfulness, conscientiousness, credibility, honesty, truth, good faith, because of their tried fidelity, perjured faith, credibility, beyond belief, faithfulness, Fulfilment, faithfulness, were fulfilled, the fulfilment of the oracle?, in good faith, with sincerity, without guile, deception, dishonesty, a promise, engagement, word, assurance, confirmation, plight one's faith, perform his promise, plighted word, confirmed, with accurate knowledge, A promise of protection, pledge of safety, safe-conduct, assurance, guaranty, protection, guardian care, due to a suppliant, Ellipt, by the protection of the gods! for heaven's sake!, Faith, Truth
confido -- to trust, confide, rely upon, believe, be assured:
perfidia -- faithlessness, treachery, perfidy;
__uic=uox
a row of houses, street, quarter, ward, A village, hamlet, A country-seat % a vetch
conuicium -- a loud noise, cry, clamor, outcry, utterances, Wrangling, altercation, contention, Importunity, A violent disapprobation, contradiction, Reproach, abuse, reviling, insult, scolds
conuicior -- to revile, reproach, taunt, rail at
ouico -- to mix with the white of an egg#
__cult
labor, care, cultivation, culture, constant, traditional methods of husbandry, training, education, culture, mental discipline, means of education, civilization, Style, care, way of life, cultivation, civilization, refinement, luxury, dissipation, neither by gluttony nor by stinginess, An honoring, reverence, adoration, veneration, for me, Attire, dress, garb, display in armor, bridal array % plantations, fields of grain
occultum -- secrecy; hiding;*
occulto -- to hide, conceal, secrete, disappear*
incultus -- want of cultivation, neglect
deculto -- - tr. - cacher dans un coin.*
__lic
to be for sale, be priced, be valued, esteemed a whit the more % to bid, make a bid, by raising a finger, bid on % a cross thread; plur., the woof, weave, a thread
perlicio -- AN??
perlicet -- it is perfectly allowable
prolicio -- to allure forth, incite
proliceo -- to run, flow forth
sublica -- a stake, pile, palisade, piles#
sublices -- Fest. pilotis.#
delicia -- -I. delight, pleasure, charm, allurement; deliciousness, luxuriousness, voluptuousness, curiosities of art; sport, frolics -II. a gutter
deliciae -- a delight, pleasure, charm, allurement, luxury, voluptuousness, pleasures, tenderness, a favorite, no cheap boon, A favorite, delight, darling, sweetheart, beloved, a precious fellow!
delicies -- c. deliciae.
delicio -- to allure, to entice, delight
delicior -- s'adonner aux plaisirs; manger avec délices.
delicium -- a sweetheart
delicius -- delight, pleasure, charm, allurement; deliciousness, luxuriousness, voluptuousness, curiosities of art; sport, frolics
delico -- to clear off, to clarify, to strain
illicio -- inlīb-.
illicium -- that which entices, an allurement, inducement
illiceor -- anlocken, verführen
adliceo -- v. adlicio.??
adlicio -- to allure, entice, attract, persuade, influence, attracts
reliceor -- to bid less at an auction
alica -- emmer (wheat) (Triticum dicoccum) groats/grits; porridge/gruel made with these;#
alicum -- c. alita.??
colliciae -- channels, drains, gutters for conducting water in the fields, upon the roofs of buildings*
collicio -- tr., entraîner (amener) à*
elicio -- to draw out, entice out, lure forth, bring out, elicit, To call down, evoke, raise, conjure up, To draw forth, extract, produce, to extract, elicit, excite, bring out, for interpreting
elices -- a trench for drawing off water, a drain
__liqu=linqu
reliquum -- the remaining, the other;, the remainder, the rest
__nic
to beckon
pernicies -- destruction, death, ruin, overthrow, disaster, calamity, mischief, A pest, bane, curse, Verres#
__seni=sene
senica -- an aged person, an old man, old woman
__caue
to be on one's guard, take care, take heed, beware, guard against, avoid, to take precautions, look out! be careful!, got out of the way, am warned by, to prevent, Beware of, take care not, be sure you do not, that provision should be made, to guard against, be aware of, beware of, provide against, keep clear of, had prevented, to take care for, provide, order, decree, dispose of, stipulate, to stipulate, ab, to make oneself secure, procure bail, take surety, take security, To make secure, give security, guarantee, to keep from, protect, have a care for, make safe, take care of % to make hollow, hollow out, excavate, to pierce through, hollow out, bend around % to beat, cudgel % cavité, creux, trou. % fossé % a cudgel
praecaueo -- to take care, take heed, use precaution, be on one's guard, beware
antecaueo -- prendre des précautions
discaueo -- to be on one's guard against, keep away from, beware of
recaueo -- to give counter-security
__cau=cauo
concaua -- hollow places, hollows
subcauo -- - tr. - creuser en dessous.
excauo -- to hollow out.
incauo -- to hollow out, make hollow
occauus -- v. occabus.??
concauo -- to make hollow, round, curve:
concauum -- concavité
__gen
cheeks (pl.); eyes; % a tutelar deity, genius, Taste, inclination, Prophetic skill % a knee, knee-joint, knee-pan, on their knees, kneeling, place tablets with prayers % to produce, give birth to, beget, bear, bring forth, son of, to produce, occasion, cause, begin, spring, grow, arise, are created, to have a beginning % the cheeks % the knee.
progenies -- descent, lineage, race, family, Descendants, posterity, offspring, progeny, child, their young, offspring
progeno -- c. progigno??
ingenium -- innate quality, nature, temperament, constitution, Natural disposition, temper, character, bent, inclination, natural bent, temper, Natural capacity, talents, parts, abilities, genius, A nature, character, A genius, man of genius, clever person, poets*
ingenua -- ??
degenio -- tr., altérer, déformer*
egenum -- a poor soil#
__ros#
a rose, the latest of the spring flowers.&mdash;Sing. collect., roses, wreaths of roses, among roses, The rose-bush, rose-tree % Plin. sorte de chanvre (de Roséa).
ambrosia -- ambrosia, sustenance of immortal life, food of the gods:
__susurr
to tear down below, to undermine, to dig under, dig out; to break down, overthrow, demolish
susurrus -- a humming, murmuring, muttering, whispering, Whispers
susurrium -- Hier. médisance.*
susurro -- to hum, buzz, murmur, mutter, whisper
__rug
a crease in the face, wrinkle, a throng of wrinkles % to roar, to bray % - 1 - tr. - rider. - 2 - intr. - se froncer.
corrugo -- to wrinkle, corrugate, produce loathing
corrugus -- canal de lavage [métallurgie].*
arrugia -- a shaft and pit in a gold-mine*
irrugio -- to cry loudly*
irrugo -- to wrinkle, make wrinkled.
erugo -- to disgorge noisily (food/drink);#
__laps=labor
to slip, slide, fall % a falling, fall, slipping, sliding, gliding, running, flowing, flight, a landslide, course, flight, rolling wheels, a failing, error, fault, refrain from blundering credulity, ways of losing popularity
adlapsus -- a gliding up to, stealthy approach
illapsus -- part. passé de illabor. - a - qui est tombé dans (sur). - b - qui a pénétré dans.*
__port__
portula -- a little gate
__tul=fer
to bring, bear, lift up
abstulo -- to take away
contulus -- Adaman. petite perche.#
attulo -- to bring to
setula -- a little coarse hair of an animal, a small bristle#
__auct=aug
increase, accession % to increase much, prosper % - a - accroissement, développement, augmentation. - b - excroissance (de chair). - c - espace supplémentaire à parcourir dans un stade.
adaucto -- to augment much
__esur
to desire to eat, suffer hunger, be hungry, hunger % hunger
adesurio -- to be very hungry
__haes
adhaesus -- an adhering, adherence
__hinn
mule. % to neigh, whinny, of horses % a mule
adhinnio -- to neigh to, after.
inhinnio -- to neigh at
__ust
a kind of red color, burnt cinnabar % - tr. - Prud. brûler, flamber.
ambustum -- a burn
adusta -- burns upon the flesh
inusta -- brûlures
__caes#
a cut % césure (t. de gram.).
ancaesa -- vases ciselés.
__renat#
int., revenir à la nage
arenatum -- mortier, mélange de chaux et de sable.
__aspret
aspreta -- rough places
aspretum -- an uneven, rough place
__ser
assertum -- an assertion
exserto -- to stretch out, thrust forth*
inserta -- an ornament
inserto -- to put in, insert
__sert
tresse, guirlande. % -I. to join, connect, interweave; to combine, compose, contrive, alternate according to the succession, joins speech, bandies words with me -II. a plant, called also
desertum -- desert places, deserts, wastes.#
deserta -- the abandoned wife#
__it=eo
coenito -- to dine often, much, to be accustomed to dine, to dine, ceno+ito;;
__mot
a moving, motion, departure, earthquakes, Artistic movement, gesticulation, dancing, gesticulated, dances, dance, of wrestlers, gestures, a movement, change, An impulse, emotion, affection, passion, agitation, disturbance, inspiration, sensation, A political movement, sudden rising, tumult, commotion, insurrection, change % to keep moving, stir, agitate
commoto -- to move very violently, to agitate
promota -- preferable things*
__cas
a small house, cottage, hut, cabin, shed, to build baby-houses, run beyond the hiding-place % cheese; pressed curd; comic term of endearment (L+S); % cheese, Cs.: % a falling, falling down, fall, in his fall, destruction, the end, A loss, fall, overthrow, ruin, failure, false step, an occurrence, event, accident, chance, emergency, such an emergency, A chance, occasion, opportunity, An adverse event, misfortune, mishap, mischance, accident, calamity, death, fate, a case % wild cinnamon, V.&mdash;A fragrant shrub, mezereon, V. % to shake, waver
concasus -- claquement [des dents]*
occasus -- a falling, going down, setting, at sunset, The sunset, west, downfall, ruin, destruction, end, death, death
__futu
to have carnal connection % être souvent
confutuo -- to cohabit with, Ct.
__fut
confuto -- [arch., fréq. de confuo], int., se produire, avoir lieu souvent
effutio -- to blab, babble, prate, chatter, to tell tales out of school*
effutuo -- to exhaust by indulgence*
refuto -- to check, drive back, repress, to repel, repress, resist, restrain, oppose, may fate avert, To repel, rebut, confute, refute, disprove
1800
__nex=nect
a bond secured upon the personal liberty of the debtor, voluntary assignment of the person for debt, slavery for debt % a binding together, fastening, joining, interlacing, entwining, clasping, coils, The state of a debtor under bonds, a personal obligation, assignment of the person for debt, slavery for debt, a linking, interweaving % to twine, coil, P. praes
connexum -- a necessary consequence, inevitable inference
connexus -- a joining together, combination, connection
annexus -- a tying, binding to, a connection
obnexus -- a connecting, connection
__sut#
plates fastened together, mail
consutum -- vêtement cousu.
__tax%
a yew, yew-tree % a kind of laurel % lard % to touch sharply, to feel, handle
contaxo -- - tr. - taxer avec.
retaxo -- to censure, reprove
__uex
to shake, jolt, toss violently, To harry, waste, trouble, harass, plague, disturb, to frizzle, To worry, vex, annoy, disquiet, trouble, is attacked
conuexa -- concavité, creux*
conuexo -- to press, squeeze together*
conuexum -- et le plus souvent*
diuexo -- to pull asunder, destroy, violate*
deuexum -- an inclined surface, a slope
__coct=coc
 % water boiled, and cooled by ice; a decoction
decocta -- water boiled down, a cold drink
decoctum -- -I. no. -II. a medicinal drink, potion
__flux=flu
defluxus -- a flowing, running off
__tons=tond
an oar % aviron, rame, rames
detonso -- to shear off
__rap
to seize and carry off, snatch, tear, pluck, drag, hurry away, snatch, break off boughs of trees, drag before a court, hale, drag into open day, torn from his home, To hurry, impel, drive, cause to hasten, snatch, hurry and bustle, reflex., to make haste, hasten, hurry, fly, To carry off by force, seize, rob, ravish, plunder, ravage, lay waste, take by assault, carry by storm, to abduct, pillage and plunder, To carry off suddenly, snatch away, destroy, hurries on, To take, catch, assume, catch quickly, imbibed, To lead on hurriedly, leads hastily on, sweeps along, to snatch away, carry along, hurry away, carry along with them, misrepresent, snatches away, To drive, impel, carry away, precipitate, transport, ravish, captivate, overwhelm, draw irresistibly, turns hurriedly, To seize by violence, snatch, steal, but may eagerly seize upon, To snatch, seize quickly, hasten, precipitate, hasten, may hastily note % a turnip, rape % - 1 - rave, navet. - 2 - racine tuberculeuse. - gr. ῥάπυς.
disrapio -- - tr. - entraîner.
dirapio -- - tr. - entraîner.
__dom
to tame, break in, drive
edomito -- to tame completely, thoroughly
__caut#
précaution. % 
encautum -- v. encaustum.
recauta -- a quittance, release
recautum -- quittance, décharge
__pall
to be pale, turn pale, blanch, must look pale, To grow pale, be anxious, be fearful, To lose color, change color, fade, were discolored % a cover, coverlet, A Grecian cloak, mantle % a long robe, mantle, A mantle, outer garment, the tragedian's garb, An under-garment % to turn pale, blanch, to turn pale with emotion, To turn pale, be yellow, wither % tr., cacher, pallier
expallesco -- to grow pale, turn pale (only
impallesco -- to grow, turn pale in, at
oppallesco -- to turn pale
oppallio -- tr., pallier
__pins
to stamp, pound, crush
expinso -- to bruise to pieces, grind
__porg
to stretch out, spread out, put forth, reach out, extend, by raising hands, extends, lengthen, To lay at length, stretch out, To hold forth, reach out, extend, offer, present, hand, present his head to the marriage halter, manūs, to reach after, strive for, seek to obtain, se, to extend, reach, grow, To prolong, extend
exporgo -- étendre, déployer, allonger.
__sord
filth, dirt, uncleanness, squalor; meanness, stinginess; humiliation, baseness; % to be dirty, be mean, be despised, be unvalued, appear worthless, seems to me no adequate price % to become dirty, be soiled
exsordesco -- to become defiled, polluted;
insordesco -- to become dirty, foul
obsordesco -- to become dirty, be soiled
resordeo -- int., c. sordeo??
__incest
a gauntlet, boxing-glove for pugilists, a strap of bull's hide loaded with balls of lead or iron, wound around the hands and arms
incesta -- a paramour
incesto -- to pollute, defile
incestum -- impious unchastity, incest
__nupt=nub2
a bride, wife % a marriage, wedding, nuptials, unmarried, ceremony % to marry wed
innupta -- a marriage that is no marriage, an unhappy marriage
__suas
1 - couleur brune, tache couleur de suie. 2 - parole persuasive. % an advising, persuading
insuasum -- a kind of dark color
__trit
intrita -- - 1 - mortier, terre grasse pétrie, pâte. - 2 - soupe, panade, brouet.
intritum -- paste
attritus -- rubbed, worn away, hardened, impudent*
__tuit=tue
intuitus -- a look, view
__ann
to designate w/nod, to nod assent; to indicate, declare; to favor/smile on; to agree to; % a year, to be four years old, a full year, with age, at the close of, during a year, each year, a whole year, a year hence, for a year, for a year, for a single year, during so many years, every year, every year, perpetually, some years later, two years ago, a season, now the year is most beautiful, The produce of the year, The age required for public office, as soon as I was eligible, the period in which the signs complete a circuit % revenu annuel, pension % pension, rente, annuité. % -I. To swim to, toward, along;, ad -II. to pass, live through a year
peranno -- to live through a year
__cud
to strike, beat, pound, knock
percudo -- to strike, break through
procudo -- to fashion by hammering, forge
succudo -- - tr. - forger, travailler.
accudo -- to strike, stamp upon, to coin, to coin further, to add to a sum of money
excudo -- to strike out, hammer out
incudo -- to forge with the hammer
__del
to erase, efface, obliterate, blot out, to abolish, destroy, annihilate, overthrow, raze, extinguish, to finish, put an end to, extinguish, abolish, annul, To blot put, obliterate, efface % to wash out, off, to cleanse
perdeleo -- to destroy utterly, to exterminate
__lit
a crooked staff borne by an augur, augur's crook, crosier, augural wand % to make an acceptable sacrifice, obtain favorable omens
perlito -- to offer sacrifices till favorable omens appear
illitus -- part. passé de illino.@
alito -- - tr. - bien nourrir.*
alitus -- nourishment, sustenance, support*
__lite
colliteo -- int., être caché avec
collitesco -- int., se cacher avec
delitesco -- ST??
deliteo -- - intr. - se tenir caché.
oblitesco -- to hide, conceal oneself
__pern__
the nostrils, the nose.
pernarius -- a ham-seller
denarius -- containing/related to the number ten; worth a denarius (Roman silver coin);#
__uig
to be lively, be vigorous, thrive, flourish, bloom, be strong, when your vigor was unimpaired, to be of repute, be esteemed, be honored % to become lively, grow vigorous
peruigeo -- to continue blooming, flourish to the last
deuigesco -- to lose one's vigor
reuigesco -- to begin to flourish again
euigesco -- to lose liveliness, vigor
__ac
thread, yarn; % a sharp edge, point, cutting part, the edge, efficiency, sharpness of vision, keen look, the sight, Brilliancy, brightness, the pupil of the eye, the eye, the front of an army, line of battle, battle-array, the legion in three ranks, The battle-array, an army in order of battle, two divisions of an army, the van, the rear, a line of fire, A battle, engagement, acuteness, sharpness, force, power, A verbal contest, disputation, discussion, debate % a needle, to embroider % to be sour. % to sharpen, whet, point, make sharp, to sharpen, exercise, practise, to sharpen, quicken, arouse, discipline, improve, will make them keen, To stimulate, spur on, stir, arouse, incite, encourage, kindle, To increase, embitter, strengthen, exasperate
praeacuo -- to sharpen before, at one end, to sharpen to a point
comacum -- a kind of cinnamon found in Syria#
peracesco -- to become sour through and through, thoroughly sour;, to become vexed, to grow vexatious
abacus -- a table of precious material for the display of plate#
inacesco -- to turn sour at, sour upon
inacisco -- to become sour in, to turn sour
coacesco -- to become acid, sour, to deteriorate, become corrupt
exacesco -- to become sour
exacum -- the Gallic name of the herb, centaury cc
exacuo -- to make very sharp, to sharpen, make pointed
__mac=macer
emacesco -- to become emaciated
emacio -- to waste away, make lean, emaciate
__iuu
to help, aid, assist, further, serve, support, benefit, by affording harbor and house, further, with the help of, a little, it is of use, To delight, gratify, please, I was delighted, will be a pleasure
praeiuuo -- to aid before
rediuia -- A hangnail#
deiuuo -- to leave off helping, to withhold assistance
__amb__
ambiuium -- a double way, a place where two roads meet
__sol
absolesco -- - intr. - Tert. tomber en désuétude.
absoluo -- to set free, release, discharge:
__ol
an olive, olive-berry % to emit a smell, smell of, smell, to smell of, savor of, indicate, betray, betray its origin % oil, olive-oil % to smell
praeoleo -- to emit, exhale an odor beforehand
praeolo -- to perceive before*
redoleo -- vto emit scent, diffuse odor, smell of, be redolent of
peroleo -- to emit a penetrating odor
perolesco -- to grow up*
suboleo -- to emit a trifling smell.&mdash; With
subolesco -- to grow up*
subolo -- to be perceived, be suspected
ambolo -- ??
aboleo -- to destroy, abolish, efface, put out of the way, annihilate, to destroy the, flesh*
abolesco -- to decay gradually, vanish, disappear, die out*
oboleo -- to smell of
obolus -- a small Greek coin, a sixth of a drachma (about three cents, or three halfpence)#
adoleo -- to turn to vapor, to burn in sacrifice, the prescribed burntofferings, to fire up, to fill with sacred fires, to destroy by fire
adolesco -- up to:??
1900
exolesco -- to grow out of use, become obsolete, pass away, cease
exoleo -- - intr. - cesser de croître.
coolesco -- c. coalesco.
inolesco -- to grow, grow upon
__mol=moles
amolior -- to remove, move away, take yourselves off, to avert, put away, remove, put out of consideration*
amolo -- mêler avec de l'amidon
amolum -- amidon, empois*
emola -- c. amula
emolior -- to move out, bring out by effort
emolo -- to grind up.
__sci
to know, understand, perceive, have knowledge of, be skilled in, for aught I know, can be learned, it is plain that, be assured, to be skilled in music, to ordain, decree % os de la hanche.
praescisco -- to learn beforehand
praescio -- to know beforehand, foreknow
conscisco -- Of public acts, to approve of, decree, determine, resolve upon*
conscio -- to be conscious, feel guilty:
perscisco -- to learn thoroughly, become well informed of
descisco -- to withdraw, leave, revolt from, desert, go over*
exscio -- tr., savoir parfaitement
ascia -- see ascea.#
ascisco -- to take to oneself, adopt, accept:*
ascio -- to receive, adopt, select:*
ascea -- an axe.#
__esc__
esca -- a dish, food, victuals, viands, meat, bait, course
esco -- to eat
__car#
to be without, be free from, be destitute of: % visage, face. % dep. % to want % cumin, caraway; % Kümmel
precarium -- -I. an oratory, a chapel -II. any thing granted, lent upon request and at the will of the grantor
succarum -- substance médicale inconnue (al. saccharon)
ancarius -- c. angarius.
__bat=battu
an unknown kind of fish % to strike, beat, hit % poireau.
probata -- sheep#
combatuo -- int., combattre avec
abbatia -- an abbey#
debatuo -- to beat, thrust severely
dibatuo -- frapper à droite et à gauche
__argu
to make known, show, prove, manifest, disclose, declare, betray, reflex., to betray oneself, To accuse, complain of, inform against, charge, blame, denounce, censure, What is your accusation?, censured the practice
redarguo -- to disprove, refute, confute, contradict
coarguo -- to overwhelm with proof, refute, silence, expose, convict, prove guilty, To prove, demonstrate, show, establish, expose, refute, has proved injudicious, betrays
enargia -- a vivid description#
__dit#
riches, wealth, rivalries, am richer than Crassus. &mdash; Treasures, ornaments, richness, copiousness, affluence % to grow rich % to enrich
subdito -- - tr. - donner en gage.
surditia -- deafness
redditus -- c. reditus.
abditum -- hidden places, abstruse matters
edita -- - 1 - ordres. - 2 - Tac. lieux élevés.
editum -- Heights, elevations, Commands, orders
__ort=ori
a rising, sunrise, from east to west, the east, from morning till night, a rise, beginning, origin, derive our origin, the birth, by birth, source
subortus -- a rising, springing up
exortus -- a coming forth, rising
abortium -- avortement.
aborto -- to bring forth prematurely
abortum -- an abortion, miscarriage.
abortio -- to miscarry, aboriendi
__rub
to be red, be ruddy, were stained, To grow red, redden, color up, blush % to grow red, turn red, redden % madder % a bramble-bush, blackberrybush, A blackberry
subrubeo -- to grow ruddy, turn reddish, blush
surrubeo -- to be somewhat red, reddish, to blush
irrubesco -- to grow red, be reddened
irrubio -- rot machen
obrubesco -- - intr. - rougir.
erubesco -- to grow red, redden
__summar__
the sea, straits, navigate, rosemary, everywhere, in all directions, at all hazards, depths of the sea, let the world be overwhelmed, bluster, make extravagant promises, carry coals to Newcastle, the Mediterranean, the Adriatic, the Etruscan Sea, Sea-water, salt-water, unmixed % a plant, catthyme
summarium -- a summary, epitome, abstract
summarius -- das Lasttier - der Packesel
__flex=flect
a bending, turn, winding, curve, a transition, change, crisis % to bend, curve
afflexus -- die Hinlenkung
__commis
commisor -- to hold a festive procession, to revel, make merry;, Absol.
__fals
an untruth, falsehood, fraud, deceit
infalso -- tr., falsifier, altérer
__obed
- intr. avec dat. et tr. - 1 - écouter, prêter l’oreille à. - 2 - être soumis, être docile, obéir. % to eat, eat away, devour
inobedio -- - intr. - désobéir.
__fi=fic
to fix, fasten, drive, thrust in, attach, affix, post, erect, set up, erected, build, set, fix on spits, injects, plants, to fix his abode, fixes, To pierce through, transfix, pierce, to fix, fasten, direct, set, take to heart, To sting, taunt, rally
malefious -- an evil-doer, criminal
__pass
a step, pace, A footstep, track, trace, A pace, stride, doublestep, a thousand paces, mile % int., se ramollir [en parl. des ongles] % prose
oppassum -- a covering, envelope#
__mors
a biting, bite, the eating, their teeth, by the teeth, open the cleft trunk, a bite, sting, pain, vexation, malicious attack, gnawing pains % a bit, little piece
remorsus -- a biting back, in return
__cus
c. cudo
accuso -- to call to account, make complaint against, reproach, blame, accuse, Supin. acc., to blame, find fault with, throw the blame on, to call to account, bring to trial, prosecute, accuse, arraign, indict, for previous offences, prosecuted capitally, of treason in the matter of Paros
incuso -- to accuse, complain of, find fault with, blame
recuso -- to make an objection against, decline, reject, refuse, be reluctant to do, to protest, object, take exception, plead in defence
ancusa -- Gloss. orcanète (orcanette) - une plante méditerranéenne dont la racine fournit une matière colorante rouge.#
__iut=iuu
adiuto -- to help zealously, serve, aid, assist, to aid in, help them carry
__ed
to eat, consume, offerings to the gods, hunger, to eat up, consume, destroy, to corrode, consume, devour % a young goat, a kid
ambedo -- to eat around, waste, consume
subedo -- to eat away below, wear away
peredo -- to give forth
exedo -- to eat up, consume, devour
exedum -- a plant otherwise unknown#
inedia -- an abstaining from food, fasting
emedium -- Isid. char, chariot.#
aedus -- a young goat, a kid#
__rat
erratum -- an error, mistake, fault
__ora__
oratum -- an entreaty, supplication
__sit
to thirst, be thirsty, are thirsted for, To be dried up, be parched, want moisture, to thirst after, long for, desire eagerly, covet
essito -- to eat
esito -- to be wont to eat, to eat
__insit
insitium -- a putting in, insertion
insitum -- a graft, scion
__alt
height, from heaven, depth, the deep, the sea, into deep water, far-fetched % int., s'élever % to make high, to raise, elevate
exalto -- to exalt, elevate, raise; to praise; to deepen;
inalto -- to raise, exalt
__proel__
to wash off, cleanse by washing
proelior -- to join battle, engage in battle, fight, contended
proelium -- a battle, combat
proelio -- c. proelior.
__ple
to rain, by the rain, rains down % to fill, to fulfil
suppleo -- to fill up, fill out, make full, make good, complete, supply
compleo -- to fill up, fill full, fill out, make full, cram, crowd, to cover the statue, to complete, make full, fill up, To man, fill with men, To fill, satiate, satisfy, supplied, to fill, make full, flood, resounds through, it has been dinned into your minds that, to fill, To complete, accomplish, fulfil, perfect, finish, to finish, complete, live through, pass
expleo -- to fill up, fill full, fill, stuff, to fill, make up, complete, have the full number of votes, To supply, make good, To traverse, pass over, go through, to fill up, complete, finish, perfect, accomplish, To supply, make good, make up for, To fill, satisfy, sate, To appease, fill, satisfy, glut, sate, To fulfil, discharge, execute, perform, accomplish
repleo -- to fill again, refill, fill up
replum -- a bolt for covering the commissure of the folding-door#
impleo -- to fill up, fill full, make full, fill, grasp, cover, were thronged, To fill, sate, satisfy, satiate, regale themselves, To fill, make fleshy, fatten, To make pregnant, impregnate, To fill up, complete, to fill, make full, cover with writing, satisfy, enriches, spends, inflame, perfectly set to music, To fill up, make out, complete, finish, end, complete, To fulfil, discharge, execute, satisfy, content
oppleo -- to fill completely, fill up, fill, to fill, occupy
2000
copla -- that which binds together, binds fast, a band, rope, thong, tie#
coplae -- poutres qui en tiennent plusieurs autres assemblées#
depleo -- to empty out, to draw off, to exhaust
__plu
depluo -- to rain down, drenched
impluo -- to rain; to rain upon;
repluo -- to rain down again
compluo -- tr., arroser de pluie, arroser
perpluo -- - intr. - 1 - pleuvoir à travers. - 2 - laisser passer la pluie à travers. - 3 - au fig. faire pleuvoir dans. - 4 - au fig. mouiller, arroser.
__ampl__
amplio -- to widen, extend, increase, enlarge, amplify, to delay a judgment, adjourn, reserve a decision, to defer one's business, put off the case of
ampla -- anse, poignée
amplo -- to extend, enlarge;, to make glorious
__ic=iaci
a blow, stroke, stab, cut, thrust, bite, sting, wound, strokes, lightning, in striking, fight hand to hand, sunbeams, jets of water, by collision, force, a beat, impulse, stress, iambic feet, a stroke, blow, attack, shock
amictus -- a throwing on, throwing around, style of dress, an outer garment, of double texture, the Trojan chlamys*
amictor -- tr., mettre, endosser un vêtement*
amictum -- c. amictus
circum.am.icio -- - tr. - envelopper de toute part.
__ris
a laughing, laughter, laugh, An object of laughter, butt, A jest, joke, mockery
inrisus -- a scoffing, mocking, mockery, derision, be a laughing-stock, out of mockery
__arc
to shut up, enclose, confine, hampered, to confine, restrain, To prohibit access, keep away, hold off, keep at a distance, avert by the sword, protect, to banish, to protect, to keep off, averted, To hinder, prevent % a bow, the rainbow, bays, an arch, circles of the earth % a place for safe-keeping, chest, box, A money-box, coffer, safe, an ironed moneychest, rely upon my purse.&mdash;A small prison, cell, A coffin, A bier % Prisc. c. accio. % to make in the form of a bow, to bend, curve like a bow
abarceo -- - tr. - empêcher, tenir éloigné, éloigner.
adarca -- Plin. Veg. écume salée (qui s'attache aux herbes des marais).#
__marc=marcer
emarcesco -- to wither away, to dwindle away, disappear
emarcus -- a kind of vine, producing a wine of middling quality#
__corn#
a horn, antler, copia, the horn of plenty, A horny substance, horn, by the growth of horny bills, A projection, protuberance, horn, point, end, from tip to tip, tips, the cone, months, branches, capes, at the end, the wing, extremity, side, A bow, A bugle-horn, horn, trumpet, The sides of the lyre, The Horn, a salient point, chief argument, The wing, flank, were his main dependence.&mdash;Power, courage, strength, might % the cornel-berry, cornel-cherry, A javelin // see cornu % to become like horn, grow horny, turn to horn %  % a cornel cherry-tree, Cornel-wood, A javelin
acorna -- a kind of thistle
__ind
to put into, insert, to introduce, to give, apply, confer % to put on, assume, dress in, shouldered, To clothe, dress, cover, wrap, deck, array, dressed as it happens, wearing, To entangle, impale, pierce, pierce, to put on, assume, To entangle, involve, entangle himself % to learn thoroughly
adindo -- to put in besides
__uss#
amussium -- a horizontal wheel for denoting the direction of the wind
__resc
to learn, find out, ascertain; to bring to light % to learn, find out, ascertain, bring to light
aresco -- to become dry, dry up#
__scop#
twigs, a broom, besom, to untie a broom, to make confusion % a kind of owl % montagne de Macédoine ou de Thrace / fleuve de Bithynie % a speculation, theory % to brush, sweep away
ascopa -- - 1 - outre de cuir. - 2 - sac de cuir, sac de voyage.
__tac
to be silent, not speak, say nothing, hold one's peace, the silent land, To pass over in silence, keep quiet, leave unsaid, not speak, not to speak of others, it must be kept quiet
attacus -- a kind of locust#
__ex
to draw out, take off, pull off, put off, shake off, To unclothe, divest, free, put forth, bares, To strip, despoil, deprive, to lay aside, cast off, divest oneself of, put away, turn into a pine, get rid of
__nex
conexum -- a necessary consequence, inevitable inference
__fou
to warm, keep warm, keep up, warmed with her naked breast, To cherish, foster, fondle, foment, bathe, leans against the tree, cling to, sit the winter through, to cherish, caress, love, favor, support, assist, encourage, encourage, by pampering, prolonged by Cupid's agency, palliate, an unfounded reputation, fondly strives
confoueo -- to warm, foster, cherish assiduously
perfoueo -- to warm through
refoueo -- to warm again, cherish anew, refresh, restore, revive
effoueo -- to refresh*
__spu
hope, abandon, placed, A hope, ground of hope, object of desire, deliverance, trust, a hope, promise, An anticipation, expectation, apprehension, dread, Hope, at the temple of Hope % to spit, spit out, spew
conspuo -- to spit upon, bespatter
exspuo -- to spit out, spit
respuo -- to spit back, discharge by spitting, cast out, cast off, eject, expel
despuo -- to spit out, spit upon
inspuo -- to spit into, upon
aspuo -- to spit at, upon
__fec#
defeco -- to cleanse from dregs; to refine, purify, defecate, clarify
infeco -- c. infaeco.
__len
a bawd, procuress, She that allures, a seductress % to soften, mollify, moderate, assuage, soothe, calm, to render mild, appease, alleviate, mitigate, calm, pacify, tame
delenio -- to soothe, soften, charm, captivate, entice, cajole, fascinate
oblenio -- to soften, soothe
__liqu
to be fluid, to be clear, be manifest, be apparent, be evident, third pers. sing, I am free to swear, non, it does not appear, is not evident, is doubtful % to make liquid, melt, dissolve, liquefy, To strain, filter, clarify
deliquo -- - tr. - 1 - transvaser. - 2 - décanter, clarifier, filtrer. - 3 - éclaircir, tirer au clair, expliquer clairement, démontrer.
illiquor -- to flow into
obliquo -- to turn aside, twist, turn awry, draw back, slant*
eliquo -- To clarify, strain*
__liq=linquo
reliquo -- tr., redevoir qqch sur un compte
reliquor -- act., to be in arrears, to leave a balance, to owe a balance, remain indebted
reliquum -- the remaining, the other;, the remainder, the rest#
__pra#
deprauo -- to distort, disfigure, to pervert, seduce, corrupt, deprave, spoil
__uot
not to suffer, not to permit, to oppose, forbid, prohibit, I forbid, I protest % a promise to a god, solemn pledge, religious engagement, vow, to become bound by a vow, obtain one's prayer, That which is promised, a votive offering, with burnt-offerings, A wish, desire, longing, prayer
deuoto -- - tr. - 1 - soumettre à des enchantements, ensorceler. 2 - invoquer une divinité. 3 - maudire.
__un
to make one, to join, unite % to join together, unite
disunio -- to disunite
aduno -- to make one, to unite, adjunctam
couno -- tr., réunir
counio -- tr., unir
inunio -- to unite
__mun
emunio -- to fortify, secure, wall off, strengthen
__ign
int., être en feu % to take fire, become inflamed, burn, kindle, to blaze out, take fire % défauts des vases d'argile % to ignite, set on fire, make red-hot
exignesco -- to become ignited, turn to fire
__ors=ori
an undertaking, attempt, Words, speech
exorsa -- a beginning, commencement, preamble*
__cox#
the hip
incoxo -- to bend down, to cower, squat down
__pex
oppexus -- a, sombing, dressing
__nou
to make new, renew, renovate, repair, is refreshed, repeats anew, reploughed, written over, To invent, coin, To change, alter, proved fickle, experience change of fortune, to make a change, effect a revolution, of a revolution, to effect a revolution % recent writers % a new thing, a novelty; news, Plur., political innovations, a revolution, innovations, new wealth
innouo -- to alter, make a innovation in; to renew, restore; to return to a thing (L+S);
renouo -- to renew, restore; to revive;
__noe
pronoea -- providence
ennoea -- an idea, notion
__sal
the open sea, high sea, main, deep % to be well, be in good health, infin, fut., to be well, be greeted: Cr, My, bless you, greet for me, Cicero sends his best wishes, hail, vale, farewell, good-by, adieu % to leap, spring, bound, jump, hop % To salt down, to salt % to save % salt
resaluo -- tr., sauver une seconde fois
insalo -- tr., saler
__seren
to refuse; to disapprove; to decline; to give a refusal; to throw back head/eye/brows as sign; % to unspin, undo, unravel
sereno -- to make clear, clear up, make serene, growing clear
serenum -- temps serein, ciel serein, sérénité.
arena -- sand, grains of sand; sandy land or desert; seashore; arena, place of contest;#
__in#
a thin fibre
subina -- Enn. Tert. une lance (pour la chasse à l'usage des Illyriens).
__tol#
Veg. gonflement au cou, gonflement des amygdales. % c. tollae
adtolo -- v. adtulo.
__pau
to be struck with fear, be in terror, tremble, quake with fear, be afraid, be terrified, seized with astonishment, express their fears, shudder % a peahen % to beat, strike. % fem., a peacock
compauio -- ??
expaueo -- to be sorely afraid of
__aus=aud2
a bold deed, reckless act, to succeed in boldness
inausa -- unattempted things, deeds beyond daring
__noc
to do harm, inflict injury, hurt, does no harm, what harm can they do?, have been guilty of a crime, no harm will befall, it is an obstacle, hinders
innocia -- innocence*
__es
eating, taking of food;
comesor -- to hold a festive procession, to revel, make merry;, Absol.
anesum -- anis.#
obeso -- to fatten
__al
to feed, nourish, support, sustain, maintain, at the public cost, have filled, nourished himself by his own flesh, to nourish, cherish, promote, increase, strengthen, cause to prosper % the belly, paunch, bowels, womb, stomach, The hold % a wing, speed, the armpit, the wing, A division of cavalry, while the troops are in hot pursuit % a game with dice: % garlic: % aloès [plante]. % - 1 - consoude officinale (plante). - 2 - espèce d'ail sauvage.
coalesco -- to grow firmly, strike root, increase, become strong, had sprung up, to unite, agree together, coalesce, be adjusted, becoming established, recovering strength, fostered
coalo -- to sustain, nourish together with
inalesco -- int., c. inolesco??
__ad#
suadeo -- to advise, recommend, exhort, urge, persuade, to be persuaded, to urge, induce, impel, to recommend, advocate, promote, support
emadesco -- int., se mouiller
__ce#
a kind of small cow % to move the haunches, Iu.
acceia -- bécasse.
__fau
to be favorable, be well disposed, be inclined towards, favor, promote, befriend, countenance, protect, like, indulge, be concerned for, is partial, listen kindly, desires, To be favorable, be propitious, promotes, linguis, to abstain from ill-omened speech, keep still, be silent % a honey-comb
adfaueo -- - intr. - Aug. favoriser, seconder.
offaueo -- to meet with applause
__musi
use, practice, employment, exercise, enjoyment, use, wear, Use, practice, exercise, the use and enjoyment, usufruct, Use, experience, discipline, acquired skill, training: Da, Ge, I know it by experience, experience in affairs?, Use, habit, usage, custom, practice, Intercourse, familiarity, association, intimacy, society, Use, usefulness, value, utility, benefit, profit, advantage, capacity, service, better in appearance rather than in real value, predic., which are of use, of great service, advantageous, serviceable, useful, Use, occasion, need, want, necessity, sum, there is need, it is necessary, it becomes requisite, there is occasion, is it necessary for any man to torture himself?, if there shall be occasion, it does not suit me, venio, it becomes necessary, occasion arises, if occasion should arise, it happens, it occurs, it befalls, actually occurred % Hier. essence, substance, être.
amusia -- ignorance of music
__si#
desiuo -- c. desino
__der#
to take away, detract
edera -- see hedera
__pig#
it disgusts, irks, pains, chagrins, afflicts, grieves; % it irks, pains, chagrins, afflicts, grieves, disgusts, do not hesitate, It causes to repent, makes sorry, I repent, It makes ashamed, puts to shame, they were ashamed to own
epigia -- un roseau rampant.
__lux#
to sprain (limb), dislocate; to displace, force out of position; to put out of joint; % excess, indulgence, luxury, debauchery, luxuriously, Splendor, pomp, magnificence, state % to riot, revel, live luxuriously % a dislocation
eluxior -- être surabondant (en qqch, aliqua re).
__li#
to be black and blue, be livid, To envy
oliua -- an olive
oliuum -- olive-oil; wrestling
oliuo -- Oliven lesen, Olivenernte halten
