!!if word ends with * and begins with __ then all the words that belong to that set unless it ends with #
are compounded.  this word then becomes the current root.
!!if a word begins with __ and ends with # then there is significant overlap with another word
! a @ at the end of a line means that that root was skipped and so it does not contain many compounds
! a # at the end of a line means that the word is not compounded or does not belong to the current root
! a __ not ended with * or > means that it is not a root
!a ? at the end of the line means that the word is compounded but i don't know the meaning of one of the compounds
!a > at the end of the line means that final word in compound is not a separate word with its own meaning but is found in many other compounds with the same meaning
!a 2 or 3 means the word belongs to a different root
!begins with __ and endswith > means all are assumed to end with > unless stated otherwise
!if it is a bonafide compound then it is purposefully split or ends with *
__bulum
medica/bulum -- a healthy place
sta/bulum -- a standing-place, fixed abode, a stall, stable, enclosure, a beehive, lairs, pasture, a lowly abode, cottage, hut, A brothel, house of ill-repute
aceta/bulum -- a vessel for vinegar
clunabulum -- couteau (de boucher, du sacrificateur).
exorabulum -- procédé capable de toucher
pulsa/bulum -- an implement with which the strings of a musical instrument are struck, usually called
petra/bulum -- a stone-thrower, catapult
digita/bulum -- a glove worn in gathering olives
ignita/bulum -- an implement for producing fire.
incitabulum -- an incentive, stimulus
paticabulum -- a cistern, pond
infuma/bulum -- tuyau pour la fumée
quassabulum -- c. pulsabulum
desidia/bulum -- a lounging-place
excipia/bulum -- épieu pour la chasse.
inquina/bulum -- filth
mendica/bulum -- a beggar, mendicant
prouocabulum -- a word that is used for another, a pronoun
suscitabulum -- a stimulant, incitement
trienta/bulum -- land assigned in commutation of one third of a public debt
uocabulum -- an appellation, designation, name, expressions
nata/bulum -- a place for swimming, a swimming - place
ruta/bulum -- an instrument for raking, stirring up.
tura/bulum -- encensoir
catabulum -- écurie, remise
cunabulum -- das wiegenartige Gestell
rota/bulum -- v. rutabulum.
concili/abulum -- a place of assembly, public exchange, market-place
__anchusa
a plant used as a cosmetic, ox-tongue
pseudoanchusa -- a plant, bastard-anchusa, alkanet, oxtongue, bugloss
pseudanchusa -- a plant, bastard-anchusa, alkanet, oxtongue, bugloss
__angulum*
multiangulum -- a polygon
triangulum -- triangle.
sexangulum -- hexagone.
acutiangulum -- angle aigu
quadrangulum -- a quadrangle
rectiangulum -- a right-angled triangle
quadriangulum -- a quadrilateral figure, quadrangle
quinquangulum -- das Fünfeck
__angulus*
an angle, corner, at right angles, the farthest corner, a secret place, nook, corner, lurking-place, petty discussions
quadriangulus -- four-cornered, quadrangular, subst.
triangulus -- with three corners, three-cornered, triangular, n., a triangle -- a triangle
octangulus -- eight-cornered, octangular
sexangulus -- with six angles, hexagonal
directiangulus -- right-angled, rectangular
uigintiangulus -- having twenty angles
multangulus -- having many angles, multangular
obtusiangulus -- having an obtuse angle
quinquangulus -- five-cornered, quinquangular
aequiangulus -- équiangle
multiangulus -- having many angles, multangular
quadrangulus -- qui a quatre angles, quadrangulaire, carré.
rectiangulus -- à angle ou angles droits, rectangulaire
acutiangulus -- qui a des angles aigus.
__animus*
the rational soul, soul, life, the mental powers, intelligence, reason, intellect, mind, attention, whose discernment, the whole intelligence of the community, Of the memory, Consciousness, recollection, self-possession, the conscience, Opinion, judgment, notion, belief, in my judgment, to the best of your knowledge and belief. &mdash; The imagination, fancy, Feeling, sensibility, affection, inclination, passion, heart, the character, bad mind, bad heart, Disposition, inclination, well disposed, both gold and the disposition, to give it, a kindly disposition, from the heart, in earnest, deeply, sincerely, from impulse or with some design, adjj., pitying him in her heart, disposition, character, temper, wild nature, Courage, spirit, to be of good courage, courage enough, hope, the violence, give it quicker motion, Haughtiness, arrogance, pride, your pride is roused, bear the arrogance and pride, Passion, vehemence, wrath, an even mind, calmness, moderation, equanimity, with even mind, contentedly, resignedly, patiently, is content to believe, Inclination, pleasure, for the sake of amusement, for diversion, for pleasure, employ musicians.&mdash;Will, desire, purpose, design, intention, resolve, purpose, to intend, my plan is, it was my purpose
magnanimus -- greatsouled, high-minded, magnanimous, high-spirited
pusillanimus -- pusillanime
semanimus -- à demi mort
exanimus -- lifeless, dead, corpses
inanimus -- lifeless, inanimate; without/deprived of/not endowed with breath;
unanimus -- of one mind, of one accord, in union, concordant
aequanimus -- even-tempered, patient, composed, calm
anxianimus -- d'humeur inquiète
flexanimus -- moving, affecting, touching, Touched, affected
leuianimus -- qui a l'esprit léger
semianimus -- half-alive, half-dead
__anthemum
an herb good for calculi
polyanthemum -- a caustic plant, otherwise called, many-flowered, crowfoot
melanthemum -- c. anthemis
__apostolus*
a notice sent to a higher tribunal, judge
pseudapostolus -- a false apostle
pseudoapostolus -- v. pseudapostolus.
coapostolus -- compagnon d'apostolat
__archia*
monarchia -- absolute rule, monarchy
biarchia -- the office of a, a commissaryship
alytarchia -- the office of such magistrate
arabarchia -- a kind of customs in Egypt
tetrarchia -- a district governed by a tetrarch, tetrarchy
alabarchia -- a kind of customs in Egypt
demarchia -- the office and dignity of a demarch
nauarchia -- 
sitarchia -- Provisions for a journey, med.#
toparchia -- a territory, district, toparchy
asiarchia -- dignité d'asiarque.
__archus*
pentacontarchus -- a commander of fifty men, pentacontarch
phylarchus -- a tribal chief, emir
comarchus -- a chief, governor of a village, a burgomaster
demarchus -- a ruler of the people, the president of a, a demarch, tribune of the people
nauarchus -- navarque, capitaine de navire, patron de navire.
biarchus -- a commissary, superintendent of provisions
exarchus -- a superintendent, overseer>
chiliarchus -- In Persia, the chancellor of state, N.#
diaetarchus -- one who has the care of apartments, a valetde-chambre
toecharchus -- the commander of the rowers
trierarchus -- a captain of a trireme, trierarch
gymnasiarchus -- the master of a gymnasium, a gymnasiarch, ext.
__argicus*
philargicus -- fond of ease
lethargicus -- affected with lethargy -- one affected with lethargy, a lethargic person
cephalargicus -- sick with a headache
__sticus>
of or pertaining to the city, city-, iselastici;
monasticus -- monastique.
plasticus -- of or belonging to moulding, modelling, plastic; Subst. m. a moulder, modeller, statuary
spasticus -- afflicted with the cramp, spasms, spastic#
ergasticus -- to be done, problems, theorems
forasticus -- out of doors, public
anasceuasticus -- propre à réfuter
ecclesiasticus -- of or belonging to the Church, ecclesiastical. -- A church officer
gymnasticus -- gymnastic;
chalasticus -- of or pertaining to alleviating, soothing
iselasticus -- of or belonging to a public entrance
antispasticus -- composé d'antispastes
scholasticus -- of/appropriate to a school of rhetoric/any school; -- of a school, scholastic
phantasticus -- imaginary
__astrum
a heavenly body, star, constellation:
miniastrum -- cinabre qui n'est pas épuré.
alabastrum -- - 1 - Mart. c. alabaster. - 2 - alabastrum = stibi.
alicastrum -- a kind of spelt, summer-spelt
emplastrum -- Cels. Plin. emplâtre.
falcastrum -- an agricultural instrument, a bush-hook
mentastrum -- wild mint
porcastrum -- a plant, also called, purslain
palliastrum -- a ragged, sorry mantle
salicastrum -- a kind of wild vine found in willow-thickets
seliquastrum -- a kind of seat, stool
siliquastrum -- a plant, also called, pepperwort
apiastrum -- Wild-parsley
balastrum -- bain.
oleastrum -- v. oleaster
hygremplastrum -- a wet plaster
__atile
plumatile -- an embroidered garment
cumatile -- 
uolatile -- a fowl
conflatile -- a molten image
__balanus
(prop. an acorn; hence), a fragrant nut, ben-nut, H.
phoenicobalanus -- the Egyptian date
myrobalanus -- 
__balista
-I. a ballista furnished with a bow; -II. a lārge military engine, resembling a bow, stretched with cords and thongs, by which masses of stone and other missiles were thrown to a great distance; a machine for projectiles, the ballista, throwing stones of a hundred pounds weight
carro/balista -- a ballista mounted on a carriage
cymbalista -- a cymbal-player
__ballista
an engine for hurling:
manu/ballista -- a hand-ballista
arcu/ballista -- a ballista furnished with a bow;
carro/ballista -- a ballista mounted on a carriage
__ellum
war, against the Germans, against kings, against the H, against, to undertake, carry on, to protract, not aggressive but defensive, to discontinue, to end by treaty, to end successfully, to terminate, make impossible, to read about, to ratify a declaration of war, to give the command in, broke out, be waged by detachments, loc, in war, during war, domi, in war-time, during war, righteous, regular warfare, the result, indecisive, the chances of war, military skill, the law of war, the character of the war, war, A feud, private hostility, an army, Battle, A history of a war
cerebellum -- brain; seat of senses/intellect; little brain (L+S);
tintinnabellum -- c. tintinnabulum
libellum -- 
labellum -- a little lip, pout -- a small basin
cribellum -- a small sieve
flabellum -- a small fan, flyflap, exciter
scabellum -- A low stool, footstool, cricket
__berullus
A precious stone of a sea-green color, coming from India, beryl
chrysoberullus -- béryl doré (pierre précieuse).
__bibulus*
given to drink, drinking freely, absorbent, thirsty, moistened
meribibulus -- wine-bibbing
paruibibulus -- that drinks little
__bibus*
multibibus -- much-drinking
seribibus -- 
merobibus -- that drinks wine unmixed
__bola
hyperbola -- hyperbole [rhét.]
embola -- a putting on board, shipment
exbola -- a kind of missile, weapon
tabola -- arch. c. tabula.
ecbola -- un javelot.
symbola -- a contribution to a feast, share, scot, shot
sumbola -- a contribution, a share, scot, shot
__bolus
a throw (of dice, etc.); hence, a haul, piece of luck:
parabolus -- a reckless fellow
triobolus -- a piece of three, a half-drachm;, a trifle
asumbolus -- not contributing, scot-free, T.
asymbolus -- that contributes nothing to an entertainment, scot-free
peribolus -- the circuit, enclosure
embolus -- the piston of a pump
ex/bolus -- Naev. rejeté, de rebut.
diabolus -- a devil, the devil, a
symbolus -- c. symbolum.
tribolus -- a thorn bush, thistle, caltrop
amphibolus -- ambiguous
heptabolus -- à sept bouches.
semi/obolus -- a half-obolus
taur/obolus -- prêtre chargé du taurobole.
petr/obolus -- lancé comme un projectile, projectile
sesquiobolus -- an, and a half
phallouitrobolus -- a drinking-vessel shaped like a phallus
__osus>
plumbosus -- full of lead, having much lead mixed with it, Sup.
glaebosus -- full of clods, cloddy
bibosus -- given to drinking, fond of drink
labosus -- laborious, troublesome
sebosus -- full of tallow, grease, tallowy, greasy
herbosus -- abounding in grass, grassy, with grassy banks, made with herbs
bombosus -- qui résonne
bulbosus -- bulbous
gambosus -- with a swelling near the hoof
gibbosus -- bossu.
glebosus -- full of clods, cloddy
globosus -- round as a ball, spherical, globular
morbosus -- debauched
nimbosus -- full of storms, stormy, rainy
uerbosus -- full of words, wordy, verbose
improbosus -- exagéré, démesuré.
__briatus
manubriatus -- furnished with a handle
debriatus -- ivre
deebriatus -- made drunk, inebriated
fimbriatus -- fibrous, fringed
__brum>
lauabrum -- a bathing-tub
cerebrum -- the brain, Understanding, Anger, choler, your hot temper#
delubrum -- a place of cleansing, temple, shrine, sanctuary
uelabrum -- a covering or awning stretched above the theatre
linabrum -- magasin à lin
lucubrum -- petite lumière.
polubrum -- a wash-basin, laver
terebrum -- An instrument for boring, a borer, an auger, gimlet
labrum -- a lip, the upper lip, to have got a smattering of.&mdash;An edge, margin, brim -- a basin, tub, bathtub, vat, in the full vats, bath#
librum -- das Buch#
commembrum -- membre d'un même corps.#
uolutabrum -- a wallowing-place, hog-pool, slough
candelabrum -- a candlestick, chandelier, lamp-stand
uentilabrum -- an implement for winnowing grain, a winnowing-fork
cantabrum -- A kind of bran#
palpebrum -- an eyelid#
pollubrum -- a wash-basin, laver
uertebrum -- os du bassin [t. d'anat.]#
membrum -- a limb, member, bodies, A part, portion, division, branches, organized, a member, part, An apartment, chamber, a member, clause#
probrum -- a shameful act, base deed#
alabrum -- Isid. dévidoir.#
alibrum -- v. alabrum.#
cribrum -- a sieve, riddle#
flabrum -- v. flabra.#
__bulum
tintinna/bulum -- a bell, signalbell, call-bell
turi/bulum -- an incense-pan, incense-burner, censer
uecta/bulum -- a carriage, vehicle
uena/bulum -- a hunting-spear
uesti/bulum -- an enclosed space before a house, fore-court, entrance-court, vestibule, An entrance, an entrance, opening, beginning
sta/bulum -- a standing-place, fixed abode, a stall, stable, enclosure, a beehive, lairs, pasture, a lowly abode, cottage, hut, A brothel, house of ill-repute
tribulum -- a threshingsledge, wooden platform studded with iron teeth
uerb/ulum -- petit mot
aceta/bulum -- a vessel for vinegar
cartibulum -- a kind of oblong table of stone, standing on a pedestal
clunabulum -- couteau (de boucher, du sacrificateur).
exorabulum -- procédé capable de toucher
fundi/bulum -- a funnel
pulsa/bulum -- an implement with which the strings of a musical instrument are struck, usually called
sessi/bulum -- a seat, chair
suffibulum -- a white four-cornered veil
thuribulum -- d, chorus
uertibulum -- a joint, med.
mandi/bulum -- a jaw
petra/bulum -- a stone-thrower, catapult
digita/bulum -- a glove worn in gathering olives
ignita/bulum -- an implement for producing fire.
incita/bulum -- an incentive, stimulus
infidi/bulum -- a funnel
infudi/bulum -- a funnel
infumi/bulum -- tuyau pour la fumée
paticabulum -- a cistern, pond
prostibulum -- A prostitute
infuma/bulum -- tuyau pour la fumée
quassa/bulum -- c. pulsabulum (quasso)
desidia/bulum -- a lounging-place
excipia/bulum -- épieu pour la chasse.
infundi/bulum -- a funnel
inquina/bulum -- filth
mendic/abulum -- a beggar, mendicant
prouocabulum -- a word that is used for another, a pronoun
suscitabulum -- a stimulant, incitement
trientabulum -- land assigned in commutation of one third of a public debt
infurni/bulum -- a funnel for inhaling smoke
lati/bulum -- a hiding-place, lurking-hole, covert, den, a hidingplace, refuge
patibulum -- a fork-shaped yoke, forked gibbet
uocab/ulum -- an appellation, designation, name, expressions
insubulum -- the treadle of a weaver's loom
natabulum -- a place for swimming, a swimming - place
ruta/bulum -- an instrument for raking, stirring up.
tura/bulum -- encensoir
catabulum -- écurie, remise
cunabulum -- das wiegenartige Gestell
rota/bulum -- v. rutabulum.
concilia/bulum -- a place of assembly, public exchange, market-place
pabul/um -- food, nourishment, food for cattle, fodder, pasturage, grass, the grass, ambrosia, food, nourishment, sustenance (pabulor)2
sabulum -- coarse sand, gravel
denti/frangi/bulum -- a tooth-breaker
phallouitrobulum -- 
__camelinus*
of or relating to a camel, camel's-
struthiocamelinus -- of or belonging to an ostrich
struthocamelinus -- d'autruche.
__camelus
a camel, C., H., L.
hippo/camelus -- a fabulous animal, half horse and half camel
struthio/camelus -- an ostrich
strutho/camelus -- c. struthiocamelus.
panthero/camelus -- v. camelopardalis.
__caminus
a furnace, smeltingfurnace, forge:
heliocaminus -- an apartment exposed to the sun, used as a winter abode
__canus
white, hoary, foamy, hoarfrost, Gray, white, m, gray hairs, Old, hoary, venerable, of ancient times
plectricanus -- qui résonne sous le plectre.
faticanus -- prophetic
omni/canus -- adj, that sings everything, everywhere
pelecanus -- a pelican
pelicanus -- a pelican
prae/canus -- prematurely gray
semi/canus -- half-gray, grizzled
soli/canus -- singing alone
taricanus -- Apic. mis dans la saumure, salé, confit.
arcanus -- secret, trusty, silent, Hidden, close, secret, private, concealed, mysteries, n., a secret, mystery, secret decrees
decanus -- A chief of ten, one set over ten persons
in/canus -- quite gray, hoary
uicanus -- of a village, villager, who go from village to village, m, peasants
lucanus -- Ital. relatif au jour. -- cerf-volant (insecte).
bascanus -- c. fascinum
siccanus -- dry, of a dry nature
publicanus -- of public revenue; -- of the public revenue, a farmer-general's wench, m., a farmer-general of the revenues
conuicanus -- one who is of the same village, a fellow-villager
docticanus -- singing skilfully
rusticanus -- of the country, rustic, country-
sub/lucanus -- towards day, towards morning
sub/basilicanus -- one who lounges around the basilicas, a lounger
ante/lucanus -- before light, before dawn, lasting all night
trans/lucanus -- qui est de l'autre côté d'un bois
__capus
a capon
pisci/capus -- a fish-catcher, fisher
urbi/capus -- a city taker, taker of cities
piscapus -- pêcheur.
__cauatus
hollowed, excavated, hollow.
multi/cauatus -- with many hollows, cavities, multicavous
ex/cauatus -- part. p. de excavo
con/cauatus -- part. passé de concavo.
subter/cauatus -- hollowed out underneath
__caustum
holo/caustum -- whole burnt offering, sacrifice wholly consumed by fire; holocaust; (Hebrew);
hypo/caustum -- a bathing-room heated from below, a sweating-chamber
encaustum -- - 1 - encaustique, peinture à l'encaustique. - 2 - encre, vernis.
__cellum>
cenacellum -- petite salle à manger
macellum -- a butcher's stall, shambles, meat-market, provision-market, all the hucksters#
sacellum -- a little sanctuary, small open place consecrated to a divinity, chapel
lucellum -- a small gain, slight profit
campicellum -- petit champ.
flumicellum -- a streamlet, rivulet
iuscellum -- broth, soup#
saccellum -- sachet.
uascellum -- a small vase, urn
uiscellum -- farce de viande#
__cennalia
tri/cennalia -- a festival celebrated once in thirty years, a tricennial festival
decen/nalia -- les jeux décennaux
__censimus
tricensimus -- the thirtieth, subst., the name of a town in, on the Rhine
uicensimus -- the twentieth.
duodeuicensimus -- 18th
__centaurus
mono/centaurus -- monstre avec une tête de boeuf
hippo/centaurus -- a fabulous creature, half horse and half man, hippocentaur
ono/centaurus -- an ass-centaur
__chordum
quadri/chordum -- Boet. instrument à quatre cordes.
deca/chordum -- a musical instrument of ten strings
__chordus*
lateborn, produced late in the season, the second crop of hay, after-math
pentachordus -- five-stringed
hendecachordus -- à onze cordes.
decachordus -- ten-stringed
heptachordus -- à sept cordes, à sept voix.
enneachordus -- à neuf cordes
__chorus*
a dance in a ring, choral dance, dance:, A troop of dancers, band of singers, chorus, choir:
mesochorus -- one who stands in the middle of a chorus, to lead it, a chorusleader
trichorus -- divisé en trois parties
octachorus -- having four sides, quadrangular
chorchorus -- la corète (plante).#
__christus
Eccl. oint, qui a reçu l'onction.
panchristus -- good, useful for every thing
__atus>
patriciatus -- the rank, dignity of the patricians, a high dignity at the imperial court
cruciatus -- torture, torment, a torturing, execution, instruments of torture -- part. passé de crucio. - a - mis à la torture, torturé. - b - travaillé, poli (en parl. du style).
fasciatus -- entouré de bandes.
glaciatus -- part. passé de glacio.
isiciatus -- stuffed with force-meat
sauciatus -- part. p. de saucio.
speciatus -- shaped, formed
calciatus -- v calceo. -- a covering for the foot, a sandal, shoe
liciatus -- begun, commenced
sociatus -- part. passé de socio.
deliciatus -- with a gutter
exasciatus -- hewn out;, properly prepared
insiciatus -- stuffed with force-meat
consociatus -- united, harmonious
dissociatus -- part. passé de dissocio; séparé.
insauciatus -- not wounded
inspeciatus -- unshapen
excruciatus -- part. passé de excrucio. - a - torturé. - b - (aveu) arraché par la torture. -- torment, torture
conciliciatus -- clothed in a garment of hair
indissociatus -- non séparé.
laserpiciatus -- prepared, flavored with
praesauciatus -- severely wounded
inexcruciatus -- ungemartert
conglaciatus -- part. de conglacio.
discalciatus -- déchaussé.
discruciatus -- violent torture, torment
phoeniciatus -- c. phoenicatus
beneficiatus -- der Grad eines
pronunciatus -- abl. sing., pronunciation
__cida
parenticida -- a parricide
tyrannicida -- a killer of a tyrant, a tyrannicide
deicida -- slayer of God
placida -- embarcation légère#
homicida -- a manslayer, homicide, murderer, slayer of men
cibicida -- breadwaster, bread-consumer
lapicida -- a quarryman, stone-cutter
rapacida -- robber
utricida -- one who cuts skins, bags in pieces, a skin-slayer, utricide
patricida -- one who slays his father, a murderer of his parent, parricide, A murderer of a near kinsman, An assassin of the chief magistrate, A murderer, assassin, A parricide, outlaw, traitor, desperate criminal
parricida -- one who slays his father, a murderer of his parent, parricide, A murderer of a near kinsman, An assassin of the chief magistrate, A murderer, assassin, A parricide, outlaw, traitor, desperate criminal
animicida -- soul-destroyer
lignicida -- one who cuts, hews wood
matricida -- a mother's murderer, matricide
corporicida -- a butcher
hospiticida -- meurtrier d'un hôte
infanticida -- a child-murderer, an infanticide
internecida -- one who by false testimony deprives another of his life
perenticida -- a cutpurse?
fratricida -- a brother's murderer, fratricide
lapidicida -- a quarryman, stone-cutter
sororicida -- a sisterslayer, murderer of a sister
__cidus
muricidus -- a coward, poltroon
di/lucidus -- clear, distinct, evident
eiuncidus -- grown, shot up like a rush, lean, meagre, slender
exsucidus -- without juice, sapless
flaccidus -- flabby, flaccid, pendulous
insucidus -- non humide, sec
subacidus -- somewhat sour, sourish
lucidus -- full of light, clear, bright, shining, brilliant, lighted, Neut, White, clear, perspicuous, lucid
micidus -- thin, poor
mucidus -- mouldy, musty
sucidus -- juicy, sappy, newly-shorn
marcidus -- withered, wilted, Enervated, exhausted
muccidus -- Mouldy, musty
placidus -- gentle, quiet, still, calm, mild, peaceful, placid, pacified him, n, tame creatures
roscidus -- full of dew, wet with dew, dewy, dropping like dew, Aurora, moistened
fracidus -- soft, mellow
murcidus -- slothful
muscidus -- full of moss, mossy
rancidus -- stinking, rank, rancid.
succidus -- juicy, sappy; fresh, fresh, plump
uiscidus -- clammy, sticky, viscid
siccidus -- trocken
per/lucidus -- transparent, pellucid;
consucidus -- Plaut. plein de sève, succulent.
dulcacidus -- of a sourish-sweet flavor
exsuccidus -- without juice, sapless
implacidus -- ungentle, savage, fierce
pel/lucidus -- transparent, pellucid.
salmacidus -- having a salt and sour taste, salso-acid
sub/lucidus -- somewhat light, lightish
insuccidus -- non humide, sec
murricidus -- a coward, poltroon
tra/lucidus -- clear, transparent, translucid.
prae/lucidus -- shining greatly, very bright
subrancidus -- somewhat rank, slightly tainted
surrancidus -- somewhat rank, slightly tainted
pertra/lucidus -- very translucid
praerancidus -- very stale;, obsolete
trans/lucidus -- clear, transparent, translucid.
pertrans/lucidus -- très transparent
__cinaedus
one who practises unnatural lust, Iu., Ct., wanton, unchaste:
wanton, unchaste, impudent, shameless
moecho/cinaedus -- a man abandoned to lewdness
spatalo/cinaedus -- a lewd person
__cinus
pedicinus -- the foot of a press
cilicinus -- made of hair-cloth
cloacinus -- Aug. d'égout.
duracinus -- hard-berried, hard
faticinus -- announcing fate, prophesying, prophetic
fidicinus -- of or for playing on stringed instruments, for luteplaying
gleucinus -- of must, made from must
hericinus -- de hérisson.
medicinus -- of or belonging to a physician, surgeon, medical, subst.
panacinus -- made of the panacea
quercinus -- of oak-leaves
relicinus -- bent, curled backwards, upwards
rosacinus -- Pelag. de rose.
soricinus -- of or belonging to the shrew-mouse
uaticinus -- prophetical, vaticinal
hysicinus -- d'hysex
coracinus -- raven-black, absol. -- a species of river fish
facinus -- a deed, act, action, achievement, A bad deed, misdeed, outrage, villainy, crime, of a teacher, the poisoned cup, criminals, abandoned men
uicinus -- of the neighborhood, near, neighboring, in the vicinity, of neighbors, m., a neighbor, f., a neighbor, neut, the neighborhood, vicinity, similar, kindred, allied, Near, approaching -- near, neighboring, in the neighborhood or vicinity
bucinus -- a trumpeter;
cocinus -- de cuisinier.
lucinus -- lightbringing, bringing to the light, subst.
nucinus -- of a nut-tree
oscinus -- tiré du chant des oiseaux (augure).
picinus -- pitch-black
sucinus -- of amber
alcinus -- vom Elentier
cicinus -- 
licinus -- bent, turned upward
ricinus -- veiled -- A large kind of vermin that infests sheep, dogs, a tick, tike
uncinus -- crochu, recourbé. -- a hook, barb
fucinus -- colored with orchil
coccinus -- dyed scarlet, scarlet-dyed; scarlet, of scarlet color;
abacinus -- Plin. de mosaïque.
amicinus -- col, ouverture d'une outre.
circinus -- a pair of compasses
crocinus -- of saffron
ericinus -- of the hedgehog
faecinus -- that makes, leaves dregs, abounding in dregs
hircinus -- of a goat, of goat's leather
ibicinus -- de bouquetin.
iuncinus -- made from rushes, rush-
naccinus -- of or belonging to a fuller
porcinus -- of a hog, hog's, swine's
puscinus -- plein de pus, purulent
saccinus -- made of hair-cloth
succinus -- of amber
tricinus -- pauvre, chétif, maigre.
uaccinus -- of or from cows
buccinus -- a trumpeter;
luscinus -- oneeyed; plur., subst. -- Gloss. rossignol.
amaracinus -- of marjoram, absol.
bombycinus -- of silk, silken
formicinus -- of or like ants
iambicinus -- iambic
morticinus -- dead, that has died, of or belonging to an animal that has died of itself, carrion-;, carrion;, dead
styracinus -- of, made from storax
triticinus -- of wheat, wheaten, wheat-
ueruecinus -- of a wether
masticinus -- of or belonging to mastic, mastic-
storacinus -- contrôlé dans le texte  de styrax
anthracinus -- coal-black
aruspicinus -- of or relating to the inspection of victims.
cuncticinus -- sounding all together;, concordant, harmonious
lentiscinus -- of or from the mastic-tree
phoenicinus -- de palmier
psittacinus -- of or belonging to a parrot
internecinus -- murderous, destructive, of extermination
haruspicinus -- relating to soothsaying, of divination, f, divination
sandaracinus -- of the color of sandarach
sanderacinus -- of the color of sandarach
__cisso
malacisso -- to, render soft, supple, to soften, make pliable
atti/cisso -- to imitate the Athenian manner of speaking
grae/cisso -- to imitate the Greeks, to adopt a Grecian manner, tone
__clericus
a clergyman, priest
nau/clericus -- of or belonging to a ship-owner, ship-master
con/clericus -- a fellow-clergyman
__cola
c. colon.
nocti/cola -- fond of the night
paradisia/cola -- qui habite le paradis.
paradisi/cola -- a dweller in Paradise, in heaven
accola -- he who dwells near, a neighbor, tributaries
incola -- an inhabitant, resident, almost our countrymen, the natives, An inhabitant, native, A foreign resident, sojourner, immigrant
agri/cola -- a husbandman, agriculturist, ploughman, farmer, peasant, a rustic, boor, clown, rustic deities
amnicola -- that grows near a river
dumi/cola -- that dwells in thickets
limi/cola -- a dweller in the mud
phascola -- a wallet, scrip
ruri/cola -- a tiller of the ground, husbandman, rustic, countryman, Priapus, his ox
saxi/cola -- un idolâtre.
uiti/cola -- a cultivator of vines, a vine-planter
dei/cola -- adorateur de Dieu.
caeli/cola -- a deity, god
fonti/cola -- dwelling by fountains
horti/cola -- Gloss. Isid. jardinier.
monti/cola -- a mountaineer
multi/cola -- a many-worshipper, one who worships many
plebi/cola -- one who courts the crowd, a demagogue, democrat
regni/cola -- a dweller in a kingdom
sacri/cola -- a sacrificing priest
silui/cola -- inhabiting woods, sylvan
terri/cola -- a dweller upon earth, a terrestrial
extra/cola -- celui ou celle qui habite au dehors
fluui/cola -- ein an einem Flusse Wohnender
precicola -- die kleine Bitte
rusti/cola -- an inhabitant of the country
popli/cola -- qui flatte le peuple.
arbusti/cola -- pépiniériste
daemoni/cola -- a worshipper of devils, a heathen
neptuni/cola -- a worshipper of Neptune
seruoli/cola -- c. servulicola.
seruuli/cola -- she that waits upon, accommodates slaves, a slave's drab
umbrati/cola -- one who is fond of the shade, an effeminate person, a lounger
circum/cola -- dwelling around
flucti/cola -- living in waves
uentri/cola -- one who makes a god of his belly, a belly-god, glutton, med.
basili/cola -- a small church, a little chapel
mustricola -- a shoemaker's last
__colum
a vessel for straining, colander, V.
macrocolum -- large-sized paper, royal paper
tricolum -- a sentence, period consisting of three clauses
__comus*
leucocomus -- having white leaves, blossoms
mollicomus -- soft-haired
albicomus -- white-haired;, having white fibres
alticomus -- having foliage high up, on the top
auricomus -- goldenhaired, with golden foliage
ignicomus -- fieryhaired
nosocomus -- an attendant on the sick, a sick-nurse?
uiticomus -- adorned, crowned with vine-leaves
anguicomus -- with snaky hair
flauicomus -- yellow-haired, flaxen-haired
floricomus -- crowned with flowers
lauricomus -- laurel-haired, covered with laurels
multicomus -- having much hair, abounding in rays
siluicomus -- qui a une chevelure de forêts.
uernicomus -- having young leaves
flammicomus -- having fiery hair, flaming
frondicomus -- leafy
__osus>
pedicosus -- full of lice, lousy
floccosus -- full of flocks of wool
medicosus -- healing
pulicosus -- full of fleas
pumicosus -- like pumice-stone, porous, Comp.
radicosus -- full of roots, having many roots
ramicosus -- afflicted with hernia, ruptured
uaricosus -- with dilated veins, varicose#
uomicosus -- full of sores, tumors#
iocosus -- full of jesting, jocose, humorous, droll, facetious, sportive
fecosus -- bourbeux. (faecus)
ficosus -- full of, suffering with, piles, Sup.
fucosus -- painted, colored, beautified, counterfeit, spurious (fuco)
mucosus -- slimy, mucous
sucosus -- full of juice, moisture, juicy, sappy, succulent.
hircosus -- that smells like a goat, goatish (hircus)
piscosus -- full of fishes, abounding in fish
amicosus -- rich, abounding in friends
buccosus -- qui a une grande bouche
faecosus -- full of dregs
furcosus -- full of forks, points (furcula)
iuncosus -- full of rushes (iuncus)
muccosus -- slimy, mucous
muscosus -- full of moss, mossy.
succosus -- full of juice, moisture, juicy, sappy, succulent.
tricosus -- full of difficulties, perplexities, full of wiles, tricks (trico)
uiscosus -- full of birdlime, sticky, viscous (uisco)
bellicosus -- warlike, martial, valorous, given to fighting, would have been a greater achievement, a more warlike year
ceruicosus -- stubborn, obstinate
corticosus -- abounding in bark (cortex)
febricosus -- that has a fever
formicosus -- full of ants
fruticosus -- full of shrubs, bushy
lactucosus -- full of lettuce
rubricosus -- full of ruddle, red-ochre
senticosus -- full of briers, thorns, thorny, briery
uatricosus -- with crooked feet, club-footed
uerticosus -- full of whirlpools, eddying
uorticosus -- full of whirlpools, eddies, eddying
uerrucosus -- full of warts, warty.
famelicosus -- famélique, affamé.
hystricosus -- prickly, thorny
pertricosus -- very confused, perplexed, very strange
speluncosus -- full of caves, caverns
duellicosus -- warlike, martial, valorous, Comp., Adv.
lumbricosus -- full of intestinal worms
uentricosus -- dickbäuchig
cicatricosus -- full of scars, covered with scars
tenebricosus -- full of darkness, utterly obscure, shrouded in gloom, dark, gloomy, darkened
__creatus*
masc., fem., sprung from, begotten by, born of;, subst., an offspring, a child
primocreatus -- first-created
increatus -- uncreated, not made
recreatus -- part. de recreo.
concreatus -- created together
exscreatus -- a hawking, coughing up
intercreatus -- inwardly created, produced
supercreatus -- grown on, adventitious
__cremus*
turicremus -- incense-burning, for burning incense
semicremus -- half-burned
urbicremus -- city burning
thuricremus -- incense-burning, for burning incense
flammicremus -- consumed with fire
__crepus*
c. caper (concrepatio)
pilicrepus -- a ballplayer
perterricrepus -- rattling terribly
bellicrepus -- qui fait entendre un bruit guerrier.
cauricrepus -- blown through by the north-west wind (caurinus)
terricrepus -- frightfully thundering
__cubitus*
state/action of reclining/lying down/taking rest; bed, couch;
a lying down
tricubitus -- de trois coudées
accubitus -- A reclining at table
bicubitus -- of two cubits
excubitus -- a watching, keeping watch
occubitus -- a going down, setting
recubitus -- a falling down; reclining at table, Plur.
secubitus -- a lying apart, sleeping alone, sing, plur
incubitus -- part. passé de incubo. -- abl. sing., a lying upon
concubitus -- a lying together, concubinage
discubitus -- a reclining at table
quadricubitus -- 
__cucullus*
a hood, cowl, cap on a cloak  a cuckoo
pedocucullus -- a covering for the feet
bardocucullus -- a Gallic overcoat, cloak, with a hood, cowl, made of woollen stuff (bardus)
__culor
nauculor -- to sail in a small vessel
iaculor -- to throw, cast, hurl, To throw the javelin, fight with the javelin, To throw at, strike, hit, to aim at, strive for
osculor -- to kiss, To embrace, value, prize
caculor -- Gloss. être au service.
ioculor -- to jest, joke, P. praes.
peculor -- to defraud the public, to embezzle the public money, to peculate
deosculor -- to kiss warmly/affectionately; to praise/laud highly
exosculor -- to kiss fondly, kiss eagerly
adosculor -- to give a kiss to, to kiss
depeculor -- to despoil, plunder, strip, To embezzle, acquire by fraud
nauiculor -- to sail in a small vessel
orbiculor -- to go round in a circle
periculor -- c. periclitor.
geniculor -- 
obosculor -- to kiss
ausculor -- to kiss
speculor -- to spy out, watch, observe, examine, explore, look around, having descried
aesculor -- tr., amasser de la petite monnaie
circulor -- to form a circle, gather in a company, gossipping
eiaculor -- rted
gesticulor -- to make mimic, pantomimic gestures, to gesticulate, pass.
manticulor -- to steal
pandiculor -- to stretch one's self
perosculor -- to kiss again and again
uermiculor -- to be full of worms, wormy, to be worm-eaten
testiculor -- tr., accoupler des animaux
depelliculor -- tr., duper, berner
praespeculor -- to examine into beforehand, part., pass.
adgeniculor -- to bow the knee before, to kneel before
adminiculor -- to support, prop, dep.
ingeniculor -- s'agenouiller.
perspeculor -- to examine, explore thoroughly, to reconnoitre well
prospeculor -- to look out, explore
carbunculor -- 
__osus>
culus),
uermiculosus -- full of worms, wormy
maculosus -- spotted, speckled, dappled, mottled, variegated, Spotted, blotted, stained, defiled, defiled, polluted, filthy, in bad repute, abominable
loculosus -- full of little compartments, cells
calculosus -- Full of small stones, pebbles, stony, pebbly, gravelly
furculosus -- en forme de fourchette
musculosus -- Muscular, fleshy
surculosus -- woody, like wood, ligneous, Adv.
periculosus -- dangerous, hazardous, perilous, Dangerous, threatening
articulosus -- full of joints, full of knots
auriculosus -- qui est aux écoutes.
cuniculosus -- abounding in rabbits
geniculosus -- knotty
meticulosus -- full of fear
metuculosus -- - 1 - craintif, timide. - 2 - effrayant, terrible.
pediculosus -- full of lice, lousy
ridiculosus -- laughable, facetious, droll
siticulosus -- dry, parched, arid
uesiculosus -- full of bladders, blisters, vesiculous
carbunculosus -- containing red toph-stone
uentriculosus -- of or belonging to the belly
arbusculosus -- planté d'arbres
febriculosus -- feverish, sick of a fever
folliculosus -- full of husks
lacticulosus -- deprived of milk.
somniculosus -- inclined to sleep, drowsy, sleepy, sluggish
tussiculosus -- coughing much, subject to a cough
laeticulosus -- too joyful, overjoyful
__culum
uectaculum -- a carriage, vehicle
ueruculum -- a small javelin
amiculum -- an outer garment, mantle, cloak
ferculum -- a means of carrying, frame, barrow, litter, bier, built for processions, A dish, mess, course
oraculum -- a divine announcement, oracle, A prophetic declaration, prophecy, A place where oracular responses were given, oracle, An oracular saying, oracle
piaculum -- a means of appeasing, sin-offering, propitiatory sacrifice, An animal offered in sacrifice, victim, substitution, An expiation, atonement, sacrifice, A remedy, Punishment, satisfaction, A crime, sacrilege
saeculum -- a race, generation, age, the people of any time, the spirit of the age, fashion, a lifetime, generation, age, A hundred years, century, age, with years
sarculum -- a light hoe, garden-hoe
speculum -- a reflector, lookingglass, mirror, smooth surface, a mirror, copy, imitation
uasculum -- a small vessel
uinculum -- a means of binding, fastening, band, bond, rope, cord, fetter, tie, the seal, sandals, fetters, bonds, prison, to plead in chains, a bond, fetter, restraint, A bond, tie, band
apiculum -- Fest. fil de laine qui entourait l'aigrette du bonnet des flamines.
ausculum -- a little mouth, pretty mouth, sweet mouth
iusculum -- a broth
liaculum -- a polishing instrument
meaculum -- a course, passage
melculum -- terme de caresse, c. melliculum
rusculum -- a little country-seat, farm
spiculum -- a little sharp point, sting, a point, A pointed missile, dart, arrow, javelin, with a javelin, arrows
torculum -- le pressoir.
uerculum -- little spring
circulum -- c. circulus
obuculum -- 
corculum -- - a - petit coeur. - b - terme de caresse.
tusculum -- a little frankincense
coperculum -- lid/cover (of a jar/coffin/etc.);
curriculum -- a small car, chariot, racing car, A wagon, A running, course, at full speed, A race, A raceground, race-course, a course, career
demeaculum -- decent underground; passage underground (L+S);
munusculum -- a small gift, trifling present
signaculum -- seal;
umbraculum -- a shady place, bower, arbor, the retirement. &mdash;Plur., a sunshade, parasol
adyticulum -- petit sanctuaire
alterculum -- henbane
asserculum -- a small beam, pole
caenaculum -- a dining-room, an upper story, an upper room, a garret, attic
canticulum -- A little song, a sonnet
cassiculum -- das kleine Netz
cerniculum -- le jugement / crible
cicerculum -- an African species of the pigment
clunaculum -- couteau (de boucher, du sacrificateur; couteau qu'on portait par derrière).
coenaculum -- a dining-room, an upper story, an upper room, a garret, attic
craticulum -- petit gril.
crepaculum -- épouvantail pour oiseaux
crepiculum -- ornement de tête.
faeniculum -- fennel
farriculum -- a small spelt-cake
farticulum -- dim. de fartum
fenusculum -- a little interest
holusculum -- a small herb, little cabbage
iantaculum -- le petit déjeuner.
iecusculum -- a little liver
ientaculum -- a breakfast
iocusculum -- petit foie.
laterculum -- a register of all the offices and dignities in the Roman empire
latusculum -- a little side
melliculum -- honey-pet, honey-kin.
obstaculum -- a hinderance, obstacle, mountains
pecusculum -- an animalcule
pinnaculum -- a peak, pinnacle
pomusculum -- small fruit, fruit
pondiculum -- a small weight
posticulum -- a small back building
pugnaculum -- a fortified place, fortification, fortress, bastion, bulwark
remeaculum -- a way back, a return
retiaculum -- a little net, a cloth made like a net, a net-work bag, a reticule, a fishing-net, a strainer, colander, a net used in playing ball, a net-work cap, net-work, for the covering of a vessel, brass lattice-work, the caul, omentum covering the intestines
rodusculum -- A little piece of brass
rudusculum -- A little piece of brass
serraculum -- a steering-oar, rudder
spiraculum -- a breathing-hole, vent, spiracle, of the lower world
staticulum -- A little statue, image, a statuette
terriculum -- a source of terror, fright, scarecrow, bugbear
tuberculum -- a small swelling, bump, protuberance; a boil, pimple, tubercle
ulcusculum -- a small sore, ulcer
uerriculum -- a drag-net, seine
uerticulum -- - 1 - C.-Aur. replis de l'intestin. - 2 - Vitr. charnière.
uiaticulum -- a small sum of money for a journey
foeniculum -- fennel
corniculum -- a little horn, a horn-shaped ornament
adminiculum -- a stake, prop, a support, stay, the limbs, help, aid
crepusculum -- twilight, dusk, the evening twilight, Dimness, obscurity, dark
habitaculum -- dwelling place; home, residence; habitation (Bee);
spectaculum -- a place from which shows are witnessed, spectator's seat, place in the theatre, A show, sight, spectacle, A public sight, show, stage-play, spectacle
admiraculum -- c. miraculum.
auguraculum -- the name by which the citadel of Rome was anciently called, because the augurs there observed the flight of birds
caprunculum -- an earthen vessel
centunculum -- Diocl. housse de cheval.
cooperculum -- a cover, lid
corpusculum -- a puny body, An atom, particle
deridiculum -- ridicule, a mockery, game, an object of derision, a laughingstock.
diuinaculum -- instrument de divination
emissaculum -- canal pour la décharge d'un étang
epicroculum -- robe de couleur jaune safran.
euerriculum -- a broom, sweep, dragnet
faenusculum -- a little interest
fribusculum -- c. frivusculum.
frigusculum -- slight cold
friuusculum -- Ulp. bagatelle.
galericulum -- a small covering for the head, a cap, in lemm.;, A kind of peruke
irridiculum -- a laughing-stock
marmusculum -- a small work in marble
memoraculum -- a monument
obturaculum -- a stopper, stopple
pectusculum -- a little breast
pondusculum -- a small weight
prandiculum -- breakfast
puluisculum -- c. pulvisculus
raudusculum -- a little piece of brass money, the trifling debt of Numerius
redimiculum -- a band, fillet, necklace, chaplet, frontlet
retinaculum -- that which holds back, binds; a holdfast, band, tether, halter, halser, rope, cable
statunculum -- a little statue, statuette
uentriculum -- the belly.
uulnusculum -- a little, slight wound
carpusculum -- socle, soubassement
diuidiculum -- 
foenusculum -- a little interest
sauiunculum -- 
tempusculum -- eine kurze Zeit - eine Spanne Zeit
uolnusculum -- a little, slight wound
gubernaculum -- a helm, rudder, guidance, direction, control, government
receptaculum -- a place of deposit, reservoir, magazine, receptacle, A place of refuge, lurking-place, shelter, retreat, a hiding-place, refuge from defeat
tabernaculum -- a tent, to select a place for observing the auspices, duly
crepitaculum -- a rattle
defensaculum -- Aug. moyen de défense, protection, rempart.
deuerticulum -- a by-road, by-path, side-way, An inn, lodging-house, tavern, low haunts, a deviation, digression, A refuge, retreat, lurking-place
deuorticulum -- A by-road, by-path, side-way
diuerticulum -- A by-road, by-path, side-way
exceptaculum -- a receptacle, med.
furfuraculum -- Arn. tarière.
hibernaculum -- a winter residence, winter apartment.
incerniculum -- a sieve, searce
obiectaculum -- a barrier, dam
obumbraculum -- an obscuration, darkening
occursaculum -- that which meets, appears to one, an appearance, apparition
offendiculum -- a stumbling-block, obstacle, hinderance, cause of offence
offensaculum -- a striking against, a tripping, stumbling
ostentaculum -- a sign, indication
papauerculum -- a plant, called also
perforaculum -- a borer, an auger, gimlet
resignaculum -- an unsealing;, a disclosure
respiraculum -- breathing, respiration
retentaculum -- c. retinaculum
reuerticulum -- a return
sentinaculum -- an instrument for bailing out the bilge-water of a ship, a scoop
subligaculum -- a waist-band, breech-cloth
temperaculum -- a working
appendiculum -- poids
hospitaculum -- a lodging-house, inn
ieientaculum -- das Frühstück
cenaculum -- an upper story, upper room, garret, attic, his hired garret
cubiculum -- a room for reclining, sleeping - chamber, bedchamber
miraculum -- a marvellous thing, wonder, marvel, miracle, wonderful imaginations, relate wonderful things, excite wonder, extraordinary size, strange forms
operculum -- a cover, covering, lid
periculum -- a trial, experiment, attempt, test, proof, essay, An attempt, essay, Risk, hazard, danger, peril, run the risk of life, take upon oneself, get into danger, release from danger, that danger threatens him, at my risk.&mdash;A trial, action, suit at law, A judicial record, judgment-roll
uehiculum -- a means of transport, carriage, conveyance, vehicle, drawn by a span, wagons, a ship to carry
crusculum -- a small, leg, shank
cuniculum -- acc.;, a passage under ground, a hole, pit, cavity, canal
diluculum -- daybreak, dawn
feniculum -- fennel
fericulum -- that on which any thing is carried, borne.
flosculum -- c. flosculus.
geniculum -- a little knee, a knee.
inarculum -- baguette de grenadier recourbée et placée comme une couronne sur la tête du sacrificateur
indiculum -- petit exemple.
nauaculum -- a harbor
notaculum -- a mark, sign
olusculum -- petit légume, légume.
opusculum -- a little work
ossiculum -- a small bone, ossicle
ossuculum -- v. ossiculum
potaculum -- a drinking, toping
reticulum -- a little net, network bag, reticule, the ball-net, racket
ridiculum -- something laughable, a laughing matter; a jest, joke
sediculum -- c. sedile.
senaculum -- a meeting-place for the Senate, hall of sessions
sudiculum -- a kind of whip, scourge
suduculum -- -I. a kind of whip, scourge -II. a kind of whip, scourge
tegiculum -- petite natte, tapis.
tenaculum -- an instrument for holding, a holder
thusculum -- a little frankincense
tomaculum -- a sausage, liver-sausage
tutaculum -- a defence, means of protection
uericulum -- a small javelin
uiriculum -- a graving-tool, graver, burin
acisculum -- der kleine, spitze Hammer - der Steinmetz
aediculum -- aedicula
nouaculum -- das Schermesser
conceptaculum -- containing vessel/place/space/receptacle; reservoir; place emotion is
collectaculum -- a place of assembling, a receptacle, reservoir
conuenticulum -- a petty assembly, association, A place of assembling
discerniculum -- The bodkin in a woman's head-dress, which parted the hair, a hair-bodkin
inhabitaculum -- a dwelling-place
perpendiculum -- a plummet, plumb-line, set by plummet, perpendicularly
praefericulum -- a broad brazen dish used at sacrifices
propugnaculum -- a bulwark, tower, rampart, fortress, defence, the fleet, ships furnished with towers, a bulwark, protection, defence, as his strongest plea
sustentaculum -- a prop, stay, support
tuguriunculum -- a little hut, cottage
foculum -- brazier
osculum -- a little mouth, pretty mouth, sweet mouth, kiss, A kiss, imprint, hurried kiss
poculum -- a drinking-vessel, cup, goblet, bowl, beaker, out of goblets, in relief, A drink, draught, potion, the poison, a philter, A drinking-bout, carouse, while drinking
arculum -- a roll, hoop placed upon the head for the purpose of carrying the vessels at public sacrifices
baculum -- a stick, staff, walking-stick, A sceptre
coculum -- A vessel for cooking
iaculum -- a dart, javelin, A casting-net, fishing-net
seculum -- a race, breed, generation, Sing.
mendaciunculum -- a little untruth, fib, white lie
obstrepitaculum -- a clamor against, an outcry
__decta*
pandecta -- a book that contains every thing, a complete repertory, an encyclopedia
apodecta -- Inscr. receveur d'impôts.
__demus*
pandemus -- affecting all the people, public, general
epidemus -- epidemic
__didascalus*
grammatodidascalus -- a teacher of language
hypodidascalus -- an under-teacher
__usculus>
nitidiusculus -- somewhat more shining
frigidiusculus -- somewhat frigid
liquidiusculus -- somewhat more fluid, soft
putidiusculus -- rather more tedious
grandiusculus -- pretty well grown up
tardiusculus -- somewhat slow, rather stupid
__diutinus
of long duration, lasting, long
quamdiutinus -- lasting how long, of how long duration
__dominus
a master, possessor, ruler, lord, proprietor, owner, householder.&mdash;A master, lord, ruler, commander, chief, proprietor, owner, despot, tyrant, who must decide, passion, arbiter, The master of a feast, entertainer, host, The master of a public show, master
uice/dominus -- vice-roi, lieutenant du roi
__osus>
lapidosus -- full of stones, stony, Hard as stone, stony
frondosus -- full of leaves, leafy
paludosus -- fenny, boggy, marshy
tabidosus -- corrupting, putrefying, decaying, med.
tumidosus -- high-swelling
claudosus -- inégal
frundosus -- full of leaves, leafy
uadosus -- full of shallows, shallow, shoal
nodosus -- full of knots, knotty, nets, versed in legal intricacies
undosus -- full of waves, surging, billowy, sea-gods
mendosus -- full of faults, faulty, blemished, erroneous, incorrect, defective, wrong, blemished, that commits faults, blundering
mordosus -- biting, given to biting
stipidosus -- woody, ligneous
hispidosus -- c. hispidus.
rubicundosus -- très rouge
__drachmum*
tetradrachmum -- a silver coin of four drachmas
didrachmum -- double drachme
__ducus
felliducus -- that carries off the gall
aqui/ducus -- drawing off water
incaducus -- solide
caducus -- that falls, that has fallen, falling, fallen, hurled, fallen in war, destined to die, Inclined to fall, that easily falls, frail, fleeting, perishable, transitory, vain, futile, ineffectual, lapsed, vacant, having no heir, n., property without an heir, an unowned estate
manducus -- a glutton
__ulus
nitid/ulus -- somewhat spruce, rather trim
putidulus -- disgusting, offensive, affected
stridulus -- creaking, rattling, hissing, whizzing, buzzing
albidulus -- whitish
bicodulus -- having two tails
blandulus -- pleasing, charming
humidulus -- un peu humide.
insedulus -- not zealous
lepidulus -- rather pleasant, rather witty
liuidulus -- inclined to envy
rapidulus -- swift, rapid
tabidulus -- consuming
tumidulus -- swollen, tumid
modulus -- a small measure, two feet high, content himself with his own limits
sedulus -- persistent, busy, diligent, industrious, zealous, careful, unremitting, solicitous, assiduous, sedulous, orators, not those who labor at oratory, Officious, obtrusive
nidu/lus -- a little nest.
nodu/lus -- a little knot
nudulus -- naked, bare
uidulus -- a travelling-trunk, portmanteau, wallet
credu/lus -- that easily believes, credulous, easy of belief, confiding, unsuspecting, Trustful, credulous, simple, Easily believed
pendulus -- hanging, hanging down, pendent, doubtful, uncertain, hesitating
acidu/lus -- a little sour, sourish, acidulous
aridu/lus -- somewhat dry
condulus -- The knob, knuckle of a joint;, plur., the fist
fundulus -- A kind of sausage
haedu/lus -- a little kid
hoedu/lus -- a little kid
mundu/lus -- cleanly, neat, trim, nice, spruce
taedu/lus -- qui est ennuyeux.
umidu/lus -- rather damp, moist
uuidulus -- moist, wet
callidu/lus -- a little cunning, sly
candidu/lus -- shining white
cinaedu/lus -- a male wanton
dependu/lus -- hanging down
floridu/lus -- somewhat blooming
frigidu/lus -- chilly, somewhat faint
fulgidu/lus -- shining a little, somewhat bright
hierodulus -- a temple servant
horridu/lus -- roughish, rugged, rude
incredu/lus -- Act., unbelieving, incredulous, without faith
marcidu/lus -- somewhat drooping, somewhat faint, languid
pallidu/lus -- somewhat pale, rather colorless
placidu/lus -- gentle, quiet, still
putredu/lus -- corrupt, foul
putridu/lus -- corrupt, foul
rancidu/lus -- stinking, rank, rancid
raucidu/lus -- a little hoarse
sordidu/lus -- soiled, smutched
trepidu/lus -- trembling, anxious, timorous
turbidu/lus -- somewhat disturbed, confused
turgidu/lus -- puffed, swollen
grauidu/lus -- schwanger
repandu/lus -- etwas rückwärts gebogen
sphondulus -- sorte de champignon
languidu/lus -- somewhat feeble
propendu/lus -- hanging forth, forward, hanging down
retropendu/lus -- hanging back, backwards
antependu/lus -- hanging down in front (of the head);
altipendu/lus -- hanging high
pellucidu/lus -- bright, shining, glittering
perlucidu/lus -- somewhat transparent
rubicundu/lus -- somewhat ruddy
__ennium*
triennium -- three years' time, three years
biennium -- a period of two years, two years, for two years, in the last two years, after two years' delay
diennium -- c. biennium
duodennium -- the space of twelve years, med.
septennium -- espace de sept ans.
tricennium -- the space of thirty years, med.
septuennium -- a period of seven years
quadriennium -- a period of four years
quinquennium -- a period of five years, five years, fifteen years
duodecennium -- a period of twelve years
decennium -- period of ten years; festival (pl.) (every 10th anniversary of emperor);
octennium -- a period of eight years
sexennium -- a period of six years, six years
uicennium -- a period of twenty years
__facio>
to make, construct, fashion, frame, build, erect, produce, compose, founded, speak, wrought, to do, perform, make, carry on, execute, join, fulfil, put, to the test, oppose me in everything, begin, work too hard for your years, To make, produce, cause, occasion, bring about, bring to pass, excite, impose, induce, excite, become known, it may happen, it happens, is incumbent, compels, I cannot forbear, take care, be sure, To make, acquire, obtain, gather, accumulate, gain, take, receive, incur, suffer, earn, form, grow fat, force, win as a friend, conquer, To make, render, grant, give, impart, confer, give assurance, inspire, if the whim seize him, administer, To celebrate, conduct, give, perform, represent, make offerings, make sacrifice, To practise, follow, To make, depict, represent, assert, say, pretend, pretended to be, make as if.&mdash;To suppose, assume, grant, admit, clause, To make, constitute, choose, appoint, render, had been chosen, inform, does not leave himself so much character.&mdash;Pass., to become, be turned into, be made, To put in possession of, subject to, refer to, To value, esteem, regard, appraise, prize, am content with, To do, do as I say, to happen, To do, act, deal, conduct oneself, will act like yourself, with malice, act, prompt action, To act, take part, take sides, is on his side, To arrange, adjust, set, spread, brace, To be fit, be useful, make, serve, answer, do, avail
labefacio -- to cause to totter, shake, loosen, make ready to fall, opened, deeply ploughed, relaxed, to cause to waver, shake, to shake in allegiance, disquieted, To shake, weaken, overthrow, ruin, destroy
nigrefacio -- to make black, to blacken, Pass.
nitefacio -- to make shining
patefacio -- to lay open, open, throw open, opened, at the breaches, made visible, to disclose, expose, detect, bring to light, convicted
putrefacio -- to make rotten, cause to putrefy, rot, To make friable, soften
quatefacio -- to shake, cause to waver, weaken?
satisfacio -- to give satisfaction, satisfy, content
torpefacio -- to benumb, make torpid
torrefacio -- to make dry by heat, to parch, torrefy, pass.
tremefacio -- to cause to shake, agitate, make tremble, quaked
tumefacio -- to cause to swell, tumefy, to inflate
turgefacio -- tr., faire gonfler (germer)
uacuefacio -- to make empty, empty, clear, free
ualefacio -- dire adieu.
usufacio -- acquérir par usucapion.
olfacio -- to smell, scent, would have suspected
arfacio -- to make dry, to dry up, Pass.?
ecfacio -- to make out, work out;, to bring to pass, to effect, execute, complete, accomplish, make, form
nefacio -- anders tun, -handeln?
arefacio -- to make dry, to dry up, Pass.?
calfacio -- to make warm, make hot, heat, flushed, to excite, To vex, trouble
olefacio -- to smell, scent
umefacio -- to make moist, to moisten, wet
pauefacio -- to terrify; to alarm; to scare/frighten
aedifacio -- Dig. c. aedifico.
benefacio -- - intr. (décad. tr.) -
calefacio -- to make warm, make hot, heat, flushed, to excite, To vex, trouble
cauefacio -- pass.
humefacio -- to make moist, to moisten, wet
leuifacio -- faire peu de cas de.
madefacio -- to make wet, moisten, soak, steep, drench, water?
malefacio -- to do evil, harm, mischief, to injure, contra
orbefacio -- to bereave, to make an orphan?
purefacio -- to cleanse, purify
putefacio -- - tr. - 1 - pourrir, putréfier, corrompre, gâter. - 2 - dissoudre, désagréger, amollir.
rarefacio -- to make thin, rare, to rarefy
rigefacio -- to make stiff, to stiffen, benumb
rubefacio -- to make red, make ruddy, redden
tabefacio -- to melt, dissolve.?
tepefacio -- to make lukewarm, make tepid, warm, tepefy
uilefacio -- - tr. - Lact. avilir, dégrader, flétrir.?
ignefacio -- to make fiery
ludifacio -- to make game of, make sport of
monefacio -- ermahnen
timefacio -- in Furcht setzen
conferuefacio -- to make glowing, melting
percandefacio -- to make very hot, to heat thoroughly
perfrigefacio -- to make very cold, to benumb
perterrefacio -- to frighten thoroughly
subferuefacio -- to heat, warm from below
compendifacio -- 
permadefacio -- to wet through, to drench thoroughly
commonefacio -- to recall, bring to mind, To remind, put in mind, admonish, impress upon
concalefacio -- to warm thoroughly:
condocefacio -- to train, teach, instruct, discipline
contabefacio -- to waste away, to wear out, consume?
deferuefacio -- to seethe, cause to boil
excandefacio -- to heat, inflame, tmesis
expergefacio -- to arouse, stir up, excite?
incendefacio -- to set on fire
inferuefacio -- to cause to boil in, to cause to boil, to boil
obscurefacio -- to obscure, render invisible
obstupefacio -- to astonish, amaze, astound, stupefy; to render senseless, deprive of feeling, benumb, Pass.
obsurdefacio -- to render deaf
percalefacio -- - tr. - échauffer fortement.
perpauefacio -- to frighten very much, to make one afraid
pertimefacio -- to put in great fear, to frighten greatly
feruefacio -- to heat; to melt; to boil; to make (intensely) hot;
stupefacio -- to make stupid, strike senseless, benumb, stun, stupefy, overwhelmed, dumb with amazement
assuefacio -- to accustom (to), habituate, inure; to make accustomed/used (to), train;
abolefacio -- to destroy, obolefacere?
candefacio -- To make dazzlingly white
desuefacio -- to disuse, disaccustom, bring out of use
excalfacio -- to warm, to heat
fabrefacio -- to make, frame, fashion, do skilfully?
frigefacio -- - tr. - refroidir.
incalfacio -- to warm, heat
liquefacio -- to make liquid, melt, dissolve, liquefy, lava, putrid, cleared, to weaken, enervate
lucrifacio -- pass.
magnifacio -- to make, think much of
multifacio -- to make much of, to esteem, value highly
recalfacio -- to warm again
subolfacio -- to smell out, perceive by the scent
adlicefacio -- to allure?
admonefacio -- to admonish, admoneo;
concalfacio -- - tr. - échauffer entièrement.
consuefacio -- to accustom, inure, habituate, I keep, at it
decalefacio -- to warm thoroughly
expauefacio -- to terrify, frighten, make afraid
languefacio -- to make faint, weary
mansuefacio -- to make tame, tame, grow tame, to make gentle, soften, civilize, pacify
maturefacio -- to make ripe, to ripen, mature
obdurefacio -- to make hard, to harden
obsolefacio -- - tr. - faire tomber en désuétude.
pinguefacio -- to make fat, to fatten?
recalefacio -- to make warm, again, to warm, Pass.
sumptifacio -- to lay out, spend, expend?
squalefacio -- to make squalid
__ficatus
turificatus -- one that offers incense
turpificatus -- debased, corrupted
deificatus -- part. passé de deifico.
excarnificatus -- part. p. de excarnifico
peraedificatus -- completely built, built up
diuersificatus -- diversifié, divisé en plusieurs parties distinctes
aedificatus -- part. passé de aedifico; construit, bâti, édifié.
mitificatus -- part. passé de mitifico; digéré.
modificatus -- Melodious
pacificatus -- part. passé de pacificor; qui a fait la paix.
uelificatus -- part. de velifico
ludificatus -- 1 - part. passé de ludifico. - a - trompé (à la guerre), dupé. - b - outragé, déshonoré. 2 - part. passé de ludificor; qui a trompé (à la guerre). -- a mocking, mockery, derision
angelificatus -- part., changed into an angel
coaedificatus -- part. de coaedifico.
crassificatus -- part. passé de crassifico; épaissi.
exaedificatus -- part. p. de exaedifico
naturificatus -- brought into being
reuiuificatus -- restored to life
honorificatus -- part. de honorifico
inaedificatus -- part. passé de inaedifico.
sanctificatus -- part. de sanctifico.
pontificatus -- the office of a high-priest, pontificate
amplificatus -- part. passé de amplifico.
carnificatus -- part. de carnifico.
falsificatus -- falsified
gratificatus -- part. p. de gratificor.
iustificatus -- P. a., justified, Comp.
odorificatus -- made to emit pleasant odor
specificatus -- distinct, séparé.
testificatus -- part. passé de testificor. - 1 - après avoir déposé, qui a déposé en justice, qui a porté témoignage. - 2 - qui a certifié, qui a affirmé. - 3 - qui a pris à témoin, qui a attesté. - 4 - sens passif : attesté, prouvé, déclaré.
thurificatus -- one that offers incense
sacrificatus -- part. passé de sacrifico et de sacrificor; offert en sacrifice ou qui a sacrifié aux idoles. -- a sacrificing, sacrifice
significatus -- part. passé de significo. - a - annoncé, révélé. - b - Plin. mentionné, cité. -- A sign, token, prognostic
concorporificatus -- united in one body, incorporated
__fidus*
trusty, trustworthy, faithful, sure, credible, impartial, steadfast, no faith should be kept, towards you, Sure, certain, safe, trustworthy, trusty
trifidus -- split into three, three-cleft, three-forked
leuifidus -- of slight credit, untrustworthy
malefidus -- unfaithful, faithless
infidus -- not to be trusted, unsafe, faithless, treacherous, false
bifidus -- cleft, parted, split
perfidus -- promise-breaking, faithless, dishonest, treacherous, perfidious, n, m., a scoundrel, Unsafe
multifidus -- many-cleft, divided into many parts
centifidus -- divided into a hundred parts, into a great many parts
quadrifidus -- fourcleft, split into four parts, into four parts
quinquifidus -- five-cleft, quinquifid
__fragium*
a fracture
naufragium -- a shipwreck, in safety behold their ruin, shipwreck, ruin, loss, destruction, a plank from a wreck.&mdash;The shattered remains, wreck, remnants
suffragium -- a voting-tablet, ballot, vote, voice, suffrage, The right of voting, right of suffrage, elective franchise, A decision, judgment, opinion, Assent, approbation, applause
lumbifragium -- a breaking of the loins (lumbus)
crurifragium -- action de briser les jambes (crus)
refragium -- resistance, opposition
__fragosus*
broken, rough, uneven, Crashing, roaring
naufragosus -- orageux, fécond en naufrages, agité.
confragosus -- broken, rough, uneven:
__fragus*
v. suffrago
fluctifragus -- wave-breaking
nauifragus -- causing shipwrecks, dangerous
naufragus -- that suffers shipwreck, shipwrecked, wrecked, of the shipwrecked, m., a shipwrecked person, That causes shipwreck, shipwrecking, ruined, m
confragus -- rough, rugged, uneven, Subst.
saxifragus -- stonebreaking, rock-crushing
undifragus -- wave-breaking, that breaks the waves, water
ossifragus -- bone-breaking; Subst. m. the sea-eagle, osprey
foedifragus -- leaguebreaking, perfidious
siluifragus -- breaking, crushing the forest, trees
syluifragus -- breaking, crushing the forest, trees
foederifragus -- c. foedifragus
__frangibulum*
nucifrangibulum -- a nut-cracker, tooth
dentifrangibulum -- a tooth-breaker
__fuga*
a fleeing, flight, running away, put to flight, caused a panic, drove, take flight, be checked, after his flight, Expatriation, exile, banishment, A flying, swift course, rapid motion, speed, a swift voyage, a swift passage, flee away, flight, A place of banishment, refuge, A means of removal, remedy, a fleeing, avoiding, avoidance, shunning, escape, honorable way of escape
lucrifuga -- gain-fleeing, gain-shunning
defuga -- a runaway, deserter
refuga -- a runaway, fugitive
perfuga -- a deserter
confuga -- one who takes refuge somewhere, a refugee
erifuga -- a runaway, a slave who absconds from his master?
profuga -- A fugitive, banished person, exile
aquifuga -- one fearful of water, one having hydrophobia
herifuga -- esclave fugitif.?
larifuga -- a vagabond
lucifuga -- lightfleeing, light-shunning
solifuga -- tarentule.?
transfuga -- one who joins the enemy, a deserter
__fugus*
lucifugus -- light-shunning, shy
nubifugus -- cloud-chasing
refugus -- fleeing back, receding, vanishing, m., fugitives
profugus -- that flees, fugitive, in flight, Wandering, nomad, Banished, exiled, m., a fugitive, exile -- A fugitive, banished person, exile
__gala
polygala -- the herb milkwort
oxygala -- oxygale [sorte de fromage blanc, fait avec du lait caillé] -- the thick part of curdled milk, curds, neutr.
__gamia*
trigamia -- a threefold, third marriage, trigamy
digamia -- a marrying twice
monogamia -- a marrying of but one wife, monogamy
polygamia -- polygamie.
__geminus*
born together, twin-born, twin-
quadrigeminus -- fourfold, four
trigeminus -- born three at a birth, triplet-brothers, m, three brothers born together, of the triplet-brothers, Threefold, triple, triform, a gate at the foot of the Aventine hill
bigeminus -- doubled
tergeminus -- born three at a birth, triplet-brothers, m, three brothers born together, of the triplet-brothers, Threefold, triple, triform, a gate at the foot of the Aventine hill
congeminus -- Aug. frère jumeau.
quatergeminus -- quadruple
septemgeminus -- sevenfold
__gena*
cheeks (pl.); eyes;
nubigena -- cloud-born, born of clouds, of a cloud
lagena -- a large earthen vessel with a neck and handles, a flask, flagon, bottle#
sagena -- a large fishing-net, a seine#
unigena -- only-begotten, only, m, a brother, sister
alienigena -- one born in a foreign land, an alien, foreign, of another land
flammigena -- fire-born
fluctigena -- wave-born, born in the waves
nymphigena -- the Nymph-born, Achilles, the son of Thetis, Polyxena, who was immolated on his tomb
draconigena -- dragonborn, Thebes
monstrigena -- monster-bearing
indigena -- sprung from the land, native, indigenous, m., a native, son of the soil, aborigines
amnigena -- Born in a river?
attagena -- a meadow-bird, the hazelhen, heath-cock#
diuigena -- born of God
rurigena -- a native of the country, countryman, rustic
soligena -- a child of the Sun
urbigena -- né à la ville
anguigena -- engendered of a serpent, sprung from dragons' teeth
caeligena -- né dans le ciel, dieu.
folligena -- produced by a bellows, droning, dull?
fontigena -- born by fountains, subst.
hircigena -- de la race du bouc.
montigena -- mountain-born
mortigena -- the producer of death, death-giver
spumigena -- foam-born
terrigena -- born of the earth, sprung from earth, earth-born
uerbigena -- he who was born of the Word, Christ
sarcogena -- vom Fleische geboren
serpentigena -- serpent-born, sprung from a serpent
__genitus*
part. passé de gigno.
a begetting, bearing, generation
primogenitus -- first-born; oldest (child);
ingenitus -- innate, inborn
unigenitus -- only begotten; only;
congenitus -- born, produced together with, dat.
progenitus -- part. passé de progigno.
pergenitus -- engendered, produced
postgenitus -- born afterwards, Plur. m. as
__genius*
a tutelar deity, genius, Taste, inclination, Prophetic skill
primigenius -- first born; original, primitive; serving as root for derivatives (gram.);
eugenius -- de bonne race, de noble naissance.
semigenius -- noms qui ont un genre différent pour chaque nombre
ossigenius -- né dans les os
__genus*
a race, stock, family, birth, descent, origin, sister, Adverb. acc., Of what race?, Birth, noble birth, high descent, A race, line, descendants, posterity, the Romans, A descendant, child, son, offspring, Prometheus, Octavianus, A race, stock, class, sort, species, genus, kind, rank, order, division, plebeians, sex, sex, rank, order, a kind, class, sort, species, birds, a kind, sort, description, class, order, character, division, manner, in every way, in any respect whatever, a general term, logical genus
collat. form of genu, a knee
christigenus -- Prud. de la famille du Christ.
limigenus -- produced in mud, slime, mud-born
puerigenus -- that begets boys
quadragenus -- forty each
ambigenus -- qui est d'une double nature.
amnigenus -- né d'un fleuve, né dans un fleuve.
aquigenus -- born in the water
ignigenus -- producing fire
indigenus -- native, vernacular
nubigenus -- qui engendre des nuages
saxigenus -- born, sprung from stone
uitigenus -- vine-born, produced from the vine
omnigenus -- -I. of all kinds -II. all-begetting, all-producing
caecigenus -- born blind
caeligenus -- heaven-born
campigenus -- entraîneur dans les exercices militaires.
capragenus -- of the flesh of the wild goat?
caprigenus -- of the goat kind.&mdash;Plur, goats?
clarigenus -- de haute naissance.
florigenus -- producing blossoms, blossoming
imbrigenus -- né de la pluie?
multigenus -- of many kinds, various
primigenus -- first of all, original
taurigenus -- bull-born, begotten by, proceeding, from a bull
terrigenus -- né de la terre.
uentigenus -- qui produit du vent.
caprugenus -- of the flesh of the wild goat?
coeligenus -- heaven-born
melligenus -- 
alienigenus -- born in a foreign land; / produced from different materials, heterogeneous
bacchigenus -- de Bacchus, de la vigne.
catuligenus -- vivipare.?
fluctigenus -- born in the waves
similigenus -- of a like kind
septuagenus -- 
quinquegenus -- of five kinds
monstrigenus -- qui produit des monstres
__giolum
nauigi/olum -- a small vessel, a bark. boat
prodigi/olum -- a little prodigy
suffragiolum -- die Abstimmung, Stimme
__glossa*
an obsolete, foreign word that requires explanation;
hypoglossa -- a kind of butcher's broom, ruscus#
buglossa -- oxtongue, bugloss, an herb
arnoglossa -- a plant, sheep's-tongue, plantain
__glyphus*
triglyphus -- an ornament in the frieze of the Doric order, a triglyph, med.
euglyphus -- schön geschnitten
anaglyphus -- wrought, carved in bas-relief, subst.?
hemitriglyphus -- demi-triglyphe.
monotriglyphus -- that has only one triglyph
__gogia*
paragogia -- aqueducts
hydragogia -- an aqueduct, canal
__gonicus*
tetragonicus -- c. tetragonalis
trigonicus -- triangular, three-cornered, trigonal, med., med.
mangonicus -- of or belonging to a dealer?
__gonium*
hexagonium -- hexagone
pentagonium -- a pentagon
trigonium -- A triangle
polygonium -- a plant, knotgrass -- polygone
tetragonium -- v. tetragonum
tettigonium -- petite cigale
mangonium -- a setting off, displaying?
diagonium -- 
__gonius*
polygonius -- having many angles, polygonal
oxygonius -- Grom. à angles aigus.
trigonius -- à trois angles
pangonius -- a precious stone?
orthogonius -- right-angled, rectangular, orthogonal
ambligonius -- stumpfwinkelig
amblygonius -- qui a un angle obtus
pentagonius -- 
__gonum*
tetragonum -- a quadrangle, tetragon
oxygonum -- Grom. triangle avec trois angles aigus.
trigonum -- triangle.
rectagonum -- quadrilatère à angles droits, rectangle
hexagonum -- a six-sided figure, hexagon
octogonum -- an octagon
polygonum -- a polygon, med.
__gonus*
hydragonus -- a water - plant
decagonus -- Boet. un décagone.
hexagonus -- hexagone
pangonus -- a precious stone?
trugonus -- the stingray?
trygonus -- sorte de thon [poisson]?
trigonus -- three-cornered, triangular, trigonal. Subst. m. a soothing pill -- a kind of fish, the sting-ray
orthogonus -- à angle droit, rectangle, orthogonal.
pentagonus -- quinquangular, pentagonal., Subst.
tetragonus -- carré, qui a quatre côtés / carré [en parl. d'un nombre]
enneagonus -- polygone à neuf côtés, ennéagone
quadrigonus -- having four angles, med.
hendecagonus -- hendécagone, polygone de onze côtés.
__icus>
paragoricus -- v. paregoricus.
allegoricus -- allegorical, Adv.
categoricus -- relating to a category, categorical
paregoricus -- alleviating, assuaging
mandragoricus -- de mandragore
__osus>
nubigosus -- full of clouds, cloudy
caligosus -- full of mist, covered with mist, dark, obscure, gloomy
strigosus -- lean, lank, thin, meagre, worn out, too meagre
rugosus -- wrinkled, shrivelled, corrugated
algosus -- abounding in sea-weed
iugosus -- mountainous
fragosus -- broken, rough, uneven, Crashing, roaring
fungosus -- full of holes, spongy, fungous, Comp., Sup.
plagosus -- given to blows, fond of flogging
uirgosus -- full of twigs
mungosus -- v. mucosus.
confragosus -- broken, rough, uneven:
depetigosus -- dartreux, galeux
__gradus*
a step, pace, gait, walk, at a quick step, at a moderate pace, hasten, charge, A station, position, ground, steps, rounds, stairs, a step, stage, degree, grade, towards my return, An approach, advance, progress, march, form, march.&mdash;A step, degree, grade, stage, rank, interval, notes, intervals, distinction, stages, Self-possession, be disconcerted.&mdash;A position, relation, overthrown
herbigradus -- going in the grass
congradus -- keeping pace with
antigradus -- degré par devant
lentigradus -- Ps.-Cypr. qui va lentement.
retrogradus -- rétrograde.
tardigradus -- slowpaced, tardy-paced
spissigradus -- slow-paced?
__grammum*
parallelogrammum -- parallélogramme
euthygrammum -- an architect's rule
__graphum*
cherographum -- Prud. c. chirographum.
syngraphum -- Coripp. billet, écrit.
autographum -- an autograph
hypographum -- a rough draught, sketch
antigraphum -- copie d'un acte
typographum -- signe, indice
chirographum -- a handwriting, hand:, An autograph:
opisthographum -- that which has been written upon on the back?
__graphus*
chorographus -- one who describes countries, a geographer
satirographus -- a writer of satires, a satirist
satyrographus -- a writer of satires, a satirist
sillographus -- a writer of lampoons, satires
geographus -- géographe.
sungraphus -- A written contract
syngraphus -- A written contract
encomiographus -- the composer of a eulogy, a eulogist, panegyrist
opisthographus -- written on the back, of the paper, opisthographic
antigraphus -- signe attirant l'attention sur le sens d'une métaphore [Y] ?? / contrôleur
artigraphus -- grammairien, auteur d'une grammaire.
autographus -- written with one's own hand, autograph, subst.
catagraphus -- painted, variegated:?
holographus -- entirely autograph, med.
idiographus -- written with one's own hand
logographus -- an accountant
mimographus -- a composer of mimes, a mimographer
paragraphus -- paragraphe, marque pour distinguer les différentes parties d'un exposé
chronographus -- a chronographer, annalist
infidigraphus -- writing faithlessly
psalmographus -- a psalm - writer, psalmographer
pseudographus -- having a false superscription, title
technographus -- auteur de traité [gram. ou rhét.].
chirographus -- c. chirographon.
cosmographus -- one who describes the world, a cosmographer
diazographus -- descriptif?
orthographus -- orthographic; Subst. m. an orthographer
hagiographus -- a sacred writer
iambographus -- ein Jambenschreiber, Jambendichter
tragoediographus -- a writer of tragedies
comoediographus -- poète comique.
historiographus -- a writer of history, historiographer
hypomnematographus -- a registrar
anthranthropographus -- peintre de portraits.
__hacopum
myrrhacopum -- médicament où il entre de la myrrhe
murrhacopum -- a medicament compounded with myrrh, for removing weariness
__hatus
myrrhatus -- Spiced, mingled with myrrh
anethatus -- assaisonné d'aneth.
bacchatus -- part. passé de bacchor. - 1 - qui s'agite en délire, qui se déchaîne violemment. - 2 - valeur passive : consacré aux fêtes de Bacchus, parcouru par les Bacchantes.
conchatus -- shellformed
incohatus -- begun, unfinished, incomplete, imperfect
lymphatus -- distracted, frantic, beside oneself -- madness
monachatus -- état monastique.
mastichatus -- furnished, seasoned with mastic
paremphatus -- avec la désignation précise de la personne.
stomachatus -- part. passé de stomachor.
triumphatus -- part. passé de triumpho.
sardonychatus -- adorned with a sardonyx
aparemphatus -- indéfini
perbacchatus -- part. passé de perbacchor; qui a ravagé en furieux.
chrysographatus -- inlaid with gold
circumscariphatus -- scarified around
__icida>
paricida -- ING
deicida -- slayer of God
homicida -- a manslayer, homicide, murderer, slayer of men
cibicida -- breadwaster, bread-consumer
lapicida -- a quarryman, stone-cutter
utricida -- one who cuts skins, bags in pieces, a skin-slayer, utricide
patricida -- one who slays his father, a murderer of his parent, parricide, A murderer of a near kinsman, An assassin of the chief magistrate, A murderer, assassin, A parricide, outlaw, traitor, desperate criminal
parricida -- one who slays his father, a murderer of his parent, parricide, A murderer of a near kinsman, An assassin of the chief magistrate, A murderer, assassin, A parricide, outlaw, traitor, desperate criminal
animicida -- soul-destroyer
lignicida -- one who cuts, hews wood
matricida -- a mother's murderer, matricide
corporicida -- a butcher
hospiticida -- meurtrier d'un hôte
infanticida -- a child-murderer, an infanticide
perenticida -- a cutpurse
fratricida -- a brother's murderer, fratricide
lapidicida -- a quarryman, stone-cutter
sororicida -- a sisterslayer, murderer of a sister
__insula*
an island, isle, A part of Rome encircled by the Tiber, A part of Syracuse cut off by an arm of the sea, An enclosed court, tenement for poor families
peninsula -- a peninsula
paeninsula -- a peninsula
__iugus*
belonging together
Inscr. c. jugum.
triiugus -- threefold, triple
altiiugus -- that has a lofty summit
biiugus -- yoked two together, a chariot-race, m, two horses yoked abreast, from his chariot
coniugus -- Prisc. qu'on peut joindre.
teriugus -- thrice bound together, threefold
totiugus -- so many
uniiugus -- having one yoke, fastened to a single yoke, cross-beam.
subiugus -- That is attached to the yoke, yoked
celsiiugus -- au sommet élevé.?
inconiugus -- epithets, not applicable to ordinary names
multiiugus -- yoked many together, manifold, various
introiugus -- that is under the yoke
quadriiugus -- of a team of four, drawn by four horses, m, a four-horse team
quinqueiugus -- having five summits, five-peaked
__laeota
cephalaeota -- a collector of a capitation tax
caphalaeota -- percepteur de la capitation ou taxe par tête
__lariolus
nummulariolus -- a money-changer.
numulariolus -- a money-changer, med.
sellariolus -- of or for sitting
ancillariolus -- pursuer of slave girls; lover of maid-servants (L+S);
__laterus*
plurilaterus -- having several sides
trilaterus -- three-sided, trilateral
quadrilaterus -- four-sided, quadrilateral
aequilaterus -- equilateral;
longilaterus -- Boet. qui a de longs côtés.
multilaterus -- qui a plusieurs côtés
__legus>
murilegus -- qui prend les souris?
sacrilegus -- that steals sacred things, that robs a temple, sacrilegious, m., one who robs a temple, a plunderer of shrines, Guilty of profanation, sacrilegious, impious, profane, m., an impious man, profane person, wretch, f. -- one who robs, steals from a temple, one who commits sacrilege
turilegus -- incense-gathering
aurilegus -- c. aurilegulus.
fatilegus -- gathering, collecting death
ossilegus -- a bone-gatherer
aquilegus -- Water-drawing -- qui a soin des eaux, fontainier, sourcier; directeur des eaux.
dentilegus -- one who picks up his teeth, a tooth-gatherer
florilegus -- flower-culling
frugilegus -- fruit-gathering
iambelegus -- consisting of an iambic measure, hypercatalectic and a dactylic penthemimeris
thurilegus -- qui récolte de l'encens
sortilegus -- foretelling, prophetic, m., a fortuneteller, interpreter of lots, soothsayer
__lepticus*
catalepticus -- cataleptic
analepticus -- fortifiant; reconstituant.
epilepticus -- epileptic
__leticus*
homileticus -- homilétique
auleticus -- suitable for a pipe, flute
athleticus -- athletic, sporty; of/proper for an athlete; [ars athletica => athletics];
colleticus -- suitable for gluing, sticking together
__linus
nitelinus -- gris de souris.
ampelinus -- of the vine
aquilinus -- of or pertaining to the eagle, aquiline
bubalinus -- pertaining to the African gazelle
bubulinus -- of cattle, ox
camelinus -- of or relating to a camel, camel's-
esculinus -- de chêne.
figulinus -- of or belonging to a potter, potter, s
ouillinus -- of or belonging to sheep, sheep's milk
scillinus -- of sea-onions, squills
suillinus -- c. suillus
uitulinus -- of a calf, a piece of veal, roast veal, f, calf's-flesh, veal
faselinus -- de faséoles.
catulinus -- of or pertaining to a little dog
felinus -- of or belonging to a cat
lilinus -- made from lilies
malinus -- of or belonging to an apple-tree
molinus -- of or belonging to a mill, mill-, subst.
mulinus -- of a mule
xylinus -- Plin. de bois, d'arbre.
salinus -- zum Salze gehörig
tilinus -- aus Lindenholz
melinus -- of or belonging to honey; -- of or belonging to quinces, quince-; quinceyellow; -- of or belonging to the marten;
biblinus -- of or made from the Egyptian papyrus
ebulinus -- of elder-wood
figlinus -- du potier, de terre.
follinus -- Prisc. de soufflet, d'outre.
hyalinus -- Of glass, glass-
pellinus -- made of skins
pullinus -- of or belonging to young animals
reclinus -- leaning back, bent back, reclining
mellinus -- vom Honig - Honigwein
collinus -- of or pertaining to a hill, found, growing on a hill, hilly, hill-
masculinus -- male, masculine
aesculinus -- de chêne.
agnellinus -- d'agneau.
caballinus -- of or pertaining to a horse, horse.
caprulinus -- c. capreolinus, de chevreuil
corallinus -- coral-red
mustelinus -- of a weasel, weasel-
nitellinus -- of or belonging to a, dormouse, the color of a dormouse
cortalinus -- pertaining to an imperial body-guard
inquilinus -- an inhabitant of a place which is not his own, a sojourner, tenant, lodger -- of foreign birth, a sojourner, lodger, immigrant
architriclinus -- one that presides at the table, the master of a feast, bis.
amygdalinus -- of or from almonds
mustellinus -- of or belonging to a weasel, weasel-
porcellinus -- of young swine, pig-
capreolinus -- de jeune chevreuil
feniculinus -- zum Fenchel gehörig, Fenchel-
chamaemelinus -- of chamomile
chamomillinus -- de camomille.
chrysomelinus -- 
camomillinus -- de camomille.
cohortalinus -- pertaining to an imperial body-guard
coinquilinus -- N.-Tir. qui habite avec un autre.
crocodilinus -- relatif au crocodile; captieux, faux, trompeur.
crystallinus -- made of crystal, crystalline, crystal
subaquilinus -- un peu aquilin.
taurobolinus -- one who has sacrificed a bull to Cybele
xerampelinus -- qui est couleur de feuille [de vigne] morte
__locus*
a place, spot
falsilocus -- that speaks falsehoods, Subst.
uanilocus -- talking emplily, idly, gabbling, prating
stlocus -- c. locus.
sensilocus -- qui parle sagement, avisé, sage
dulcilocus -- dont le son est doux, harmonieux.
dulciorelocus -- speaking with a sweet mouth
heteroplocus -- à entrelacement varié#
__loga>
physiologa -- Physiology
ecloga -- a selection, short poem, eclogue
__logia*
philologia -- love of study, literary culture
analogia -- the resemblance, agreement of several things;, the analogy of language, analogy
apologia -- a defence, apology, the title of a work by Apuleius of Madaura;
acyrologia -- an impropriety of speech;, improprium, impropria dictio, improprium, tantum sperare dolorem?
aetiologia -- an allegation of reasons, a bringing of proofs?
astrologia -- the science of the heavenly bodies, astronomy.
etymologia -- etymology
genealogia -- a genealogy
macrologia -- tediousness in speech
palillogia -- répétition [fig. de rhét.]?
tautologia -- a repetition of the same meaning in different words, tautology
tropologia -- a figurative manner of speaking, a metaphorical, tropical style, tropology
mythologia -- mythology, a work of Fulgentius, in which the origin of the myths is indicated
aeschrologia -- an expression improper on account of its ambiguity?
amphibologia -- amphibologie, ambiguïté, équivoque.
hysterologia -- the hysteron proteron
perissologia -- redundancy of expression?
pithanologia -- Iren. exposé ou production de raisons, de preuves, d'arguments.?
dilogia -- ambiguity
eulogia -- - 1 - présent, cadeau. - 2 - Aug. pain bénit.
cacologia -- Gloss. injure.
ethologia -- the art of depicting, imitating character?
theologia -- theology
palilogia -- the emphatic repetition of a word, idea?
carphologia -- a picking of pieces of straw from the, mud, walls?
crithologia -- a gathering of barley?
dicaeologia -- a plea, defence?
physiologia -- knowledge of nature, natural philosophy
aperantologia -- Varr. bavardage intarissable.?
genethlialogia -- art des horoscopes, astrologie.?
genethliologia -- the art of calculating nativities, casting horoscopes?
parhomoeologia -- concession dont on se prévaut contre son adversaire?
__logumena*
physiologumena -- recherches sur l'histoire naturelle
anthologumena -- anthologie.
__logus*
morologus -- speaking foolishly, foolish, subst., a fool
catalogus -- an enumeration, a list of names, a catalogue
decalogus -- the decalogue
ethologus -- imitating manners, mocking personal peculiarities
homologus -- a later colonist
idiologus -- Inscr. administrateur du domaine personnel de l'empereur.
mimologus -- an actor in mimic plays, farces, a mime
theologus -- one who writes of the gods
epilogus -- a peroration, epilogue
analogus -- analogous, proportionate
apologus -- a fable after the manner of Aesop, an apologue.
dialogus -- a discussion, treatise in conversational form, dialogue
prologus -- a preface to a play, prologue, One who recites a prologue
astrologus -- an astronomer: -- de l'astronomie
aretalogus -- a prattler about virtue:
genealogus -- a genealogist
hymnologus -- a singer of hymns, praises
philologus -- scholarly, learned
physiologus -- of or belonging to physiology, physiological;
neaniscologus -- speaking in a juvenile manner?
christologus -- Capit. beau parleur (sobriquet de Pertinax).
__longus*
long, extended, a war-ship, man-of-war, the heroic hexameter, further, farreaching, In length, long, in length, Great, vast, spacious, Long, of long duration, lasting, prolonged, tedious, after a long interval, a great age, length of days, slow, it would be tedious, to speak briefly, to spin out, tedious, that he was impatient, nothing is more tedious, since long ago, looking far ahead, slow to hope, Distant, remote, long delayed, n., long postponed, delay
trilongus -- consisting of three long syllables
perlongus -- very long.
bilongus -- doubly long, consisting of two long syllables
oblongus -- more long than wide, oblong
praelongus -- very long;
antelongus -- comp. antelongior, en parlant d'un nombre qui est le produit de deux facteurs dont le premier est le plus grand, ex.
__loquium*
maliloquium -- an evil-speaking, slander
mendaciloquium -- false-speaking, falsehood, mendacity
stultiloquium -- silly talk, babbling, stultiloquy
turpiloquium -- obscene, immodest speech
ueriloquium -- etymology
colloquium -- talk, conversation; colloquy/discussion; interview; meeting/conference; parley;
proloquium -- An introduction, preamble
anteloquium -- The right of speaking before another
boniloquium -- beau langage.
fatiloquium -- prophecy
maleloquium -- médisance.
risiloquium -- a tattling and laughing at the same time
soliloquium -- a talking to one's self, a soliloquy
uaniloquium -- empty, idle talk, gabble, prate, vaunting
altiloquium -- discours sublime.
praeloquium -- préambule, exorde
parciloquium -- a speaking sparingly, reserve in conversation
breuiloquium -- brevity
falsiloquium -- false speaking, falsehood, lying
inaniloquium -- a vain talking
interloquium -- interruption, contradiction
longiloquium -- a long speech
magniloquium -- pomposity, boasting
multiloquium -- a much-speaking
pauciloquium -- a speaking but little
suauiloquium -- the speaking pleasant things?
tortiloquium -- Gloss. langage entortillé.?
paruiloquium -- sobriété de paroles?
uerbiloquium -- discours
adloquium -- an exhortation, encouragement, solaces
obloquium -- a contradiction
alieniloquium -- the talk of crazy persons
blandiloquium -- soft words, flattering speech
minutiloquium -- brevity of speech
spurciloquium -- filthy, smutty language, obscenity?
obscuriloquium -- énigme
portentiloquium -- discours sur des choses prodigieuses
__luca*
noctiluca -- that shines by night, the moon
balluca -- sable d'or.
baluca -- sable d'or.
__lucus*
a sacred grove, consecrated wood, park surrounding a temple, A wood, grove
light (old for lux): cum primo lucu, at daybreak
noctulucus -- watching, waking, seeing at night
plaustrilucus -- shining like Charles's Wain, brilliant
astilucus -- qui brille comme un astre?
helucus -- assoupissement, somnolence?
hellucus -- - 1 - étourdi par l'ivresse, assoupi. - 2 - assoupissement, somnolence, engourdissement.?
astrilucus -- shining, gleaming like stars
noctilucus -- qui luit pendant la nuit.
__machia*
naumachia -- mock sea battle staged as spectacle/game/exercise;
monomachia -- a single combat, duel
perimachia -- an attack, hostile assault
lysimachia -- a plant#
corycomachia -- the exercise of the, with the?
psychomachia -- The Contest of the Soul
sphaeromachia -- a kind of boxing in which the combatants?
__mani
tricesimani -- soldiers of the thirtieth legion
humani -- 
septimani -- soldiers of the seventh legion
primani -- soldiers of the first legion
undecumani -- soldiers of the eleventh legion
uicesimani -- soldiers of the twentieth legion
undecimani -- v. undecumani.
tricensimani -- v. tricesimani.
decumani -- porta praetoria
duoetuicesimani -- soldiers of the twenty-second legion
unaetuicesimani -- soldiers of the twentyfirst legion
sextadecimani -- the soldiers of the sixteenth legion
sextadecumani -- die Soldaten von der sechzehnten Legion - die Sechzehner
quartadecimani -- les soldats de la quatorzième légion.
quartadecumani -- soldiers of the fourteenth legion
quintadecimani -- the soldiers of the fifteenth legion, the men of the fifteenth
quintadecumani -- Tac. soldats de la quinzième légion.
tertiadecimani -- soldiers of the thirteenth legion
tertiadecumani -- soldiers of the thirteenth legion
undeuicesimani -- soldiers of the nineteenth legion
unetuicesimani -- soldiers of the twenty-first legion
duoetuicensimani -- Soldaten der zweiundzwanzigsten Legion, Zweiundzwanziger
__manus
a hand, lay down, refrained, with great care, outgrew the rod, liberally, by careful nursing, by the assistance, from hand to hand, might, arrests.&mdash;The hand, close upon us, at hand, at close quarters, within reach, as private secretary, ready money, accessible, plain and palpable, palpable proofs, close to, am engaged on, is not read, paid attentions to, by manual labor, bodily, by your hand, artificially, under my control, rests with you, I could not determine, subject, suffered to escape, while they had the opportunity, with might and main, forcibly, a drawn battle, a blow, turn a hand, try conclusions, fight, brave in battle, by force, stormed, by suicide, actual fight, compulsion, give himself up, yielded, consented, to supplicate, finish, skilled hands, the work is finished.&mdash;A hand, handwriting, style, work, workmanship, the comparative skill, A side, a hand, trunk, claw, claws, grappling-hooks, grappling-irons, A body, band, company, host, collection, troop, corps, force, the Centaurs, labor, hands, workmen
i. q. bonus
tri/manus -- qui a trois mains
in/humanus -- rude, savage, barbarous, brutal, inhuman
decumanus -- of the tenth part, of tithes, that pays tithes, a tithe of the produce. &mdash; Collecting tithes, farming tithes, a tithe-farmer's wife, m., a tithe-farmer, tax-collector, fit for a tax-collector, of the largest size, Of the tenth cohort, m, soldiers of the tenth legion -- a farmer of tithes, tithe-gatherer
ambi/manus -- qui a deux mains
decimanus -- of or belonging to the tenth part. -- fermier, percepteur de la dîme
humanus -- of man, human, a human head, human sacrifices, the human race, of superhuman size, against men, n., of human feeling, superhuman, human affairs, concerns of men, events of life, Humane, philanthropic, kind, gentle, obliging, polite, Of good education, well-informed, learned, polite, refined, civilized
ulmanus -- situé près des ormes.
primanus -- soldiers (pl.) of the first legion;
germanus -- full, own, m., an own brother, full brother, your mother's son, Genuine, real, actual, true
uni/manus -- with a single hand, one-handed
aequi/manus -- who can use both hands equally well, ambidextrous, of equal skill in two departments, in two pursuits
angui/manus -- with serpent-hand
centi/manus -- with a hundred hands
per/humanus -- very kind, truly courteous
septimanus -- of or belonging to the number seven, falling on the seventh day of the month
uicesimanus -- soldiers (pl.) of the twentieth legion;
congermanus -- grown together with, united with
quadrimanus -- quadrumane
duodecimanus -- v. decimanus
transulmanus -- situé au-delà d'une ormaie
quartadecumanus -- soldiers (pl.) of the fourteenth legion;
quintadecumanus -- soldiers of the fifteenth legion;
unetuicesimanus -- soldiers (pl.) of the twenty-first legion;
quartodecimanus -- du quatorzième jour
__matus
drunk, intoxicated
trimatus -- the age of three years
inhumatus -- unburied;
automatus -- self - moving, voluntary, spontaneous, subst.
decimatus -- part. passé de decimo. - 1 - décimé. - 2 - choisi, distingué; de choix, d'élite.
dedomatus -- bien dompté.
defamatus -- dishonored, infamous
delimatus -- filed off
exarmatus -- (Lebaigue P. 448 et P. 449) - 1 - désarmé. - 2 - qui a perdu ses moyens de défense, désemparé (vaisseau). - 3 - vaincu, abattu.
illimatus -- fastened, attached by means of rich earth
infamatus -- of ill repute
infumatus -- séché à la fumée.
intimatus -- part. passé de intimo. - 1 - introduit, inséré. - 2 - exposé, déclaré.
racematus -- having clusters, berries
calamatus -- sorte de bonnet, de casque
decumatus -- 
infimatus -- p. de infimo
oblimatus -- part. passé de oblimo; couvert de boue, plein de boue.
flammatus -- part. passé de flammo. - 1 - enflammé, embrasé, consumé. - 2 - brûlant, enflammé, irrité. - 3 - ardent, couleur de feu. -- action d'enflammer.
squamatus -- scaly -- sorte de poisson [chien de mer ?]
armatus -- armed, equipped, in arms, soldiers, m., armed men, soldiers, under arms, hostility. &mdash; Furnished, equipped, provided -- armor, equipment, armed men, troops
comatus -- long-haired, having (long) hair; leafy; [Gallia Comata => Transalpine Gaul];
domatus -- v. domo.
famatus -- in bad odor, notorious, disreputable
hamatus -- furnished with a hook, hooked, Shaped like a hook, hooked, crooked
humatus -- part. passé de humo; inhumé.
limatus -- polished, refined, elegant, fine, accurate
rimatus -- pass.
sematus -- qui est à moitié [vide ou plein]
simatus -- c. sīmus.
fumatus -- (Lebaigue P. 531) part. passé de fumo; enfumé.
numatus -- moneyed, furnished with money, rich
bimatus -- âgé de deux ans -- the age of two years
palmatus -- bearing palms, embroidered with palm-twigs
adamatus -- part. passé de adamo.
crematus -- part. passé de cremo.
cummatus -- Pall. gommeux, qui contient de la gomme.
deamatus -- part. passé de deamo; bienvenu, qui a fait plaisir.
elimatus -- 1 - part. passé de elimo [e + lima]. - a - enlevé à la lime. - b - au fig. Cic. limé, poli, fin. - c - affaibli, énervé. 2 - part. passé de elimo [e + limus]. - Macr. nettoyé, purgé, purifié.
firmatus -- P. of firmo
formatus -- part. passé de formo. - 1 - formé, représenté, figuré. - 2 - au fig. formé, dressé; formé dans l'esprit, imaginé, inventé. - 3 - composé, écrit.
gammatus -- shaped like a gamma, gamma-shaped
gemmatus -- set with jewels, jewelled
gummatus -- containing gum, gummy
hiematus -- part. passé de hiemo.
inamatus -- not loved, disliked
mammatus -- furnished with little pipes
normatus -- adjusted according to the square
nummatus -- moneyed, rich
opimatus -- part. passé de opimo; engraissé, gras.
parmatus -- bearing the parma, with light shields, light-armed
plumatus -- covered with feathers, feathered
primatus -- the first place, rank, preference, pre-eminence, primacy
summatus -- chief rule, supremacy, sovereignty
edomatus -- part. passé de edomo. - Aug. dompté, surmonté.
animatus -- disposed, inclined, minded, favorable -- a breathing
clamatus -- part. passé de clamo. - a - appelé avec des cris. - b - proclamé. - c - qui retentit de cris. -- a crying aloud, shouting
spumatus -- P. of spumo -- a foaming, frothing, foam, froth
adfirmatus -- part. passé de adfirmo. - 1 - affermi, garanti. - 2 - affirmé, confirmé, prouvé, assuré.
biformatus -- of two forms, double:
declamatus -- part. passé de declamo.
deplumatus -- qui a perdu ses plumes, qui mue.
despumatus -- part. passé de despumo; dont on a enlevé l'écume.
diffamatus -- part. passé de diffamo; divulgué.
exanimatus -- P. of exanimc
exclamatus -- part. p. de exclamo
inanimatus -- lifeless, inanimate
inclamatus -- part. de inclamo
incrematus -- part. passé de incremo; brûlé.
inelimatus -- qui n'est pas limé
infirmatus -- part. de infirmo
informatus -- P. of informo
lacrimatus -- part. passé de lacrimo; qui coule en larmes (en parl. de la myrrhe).
offirmatus -- firm, obstinate
perarmatus -- thoroughly armed, well equipped
podismatus -- measured out by feet
postumatus -- the last, lowest place
sublimatus -- part. passé de sublimo.
arythmatus -- dépourvu de rythme, dépourvu d'harmonie.
denormatus -- part. passé de denormo; tortueux, tortu.
dilemmatus -- amphibologique
epitomatus -- part. passé de epitomo; mis en abrégé.
redarmatus -- armed again, rearmed
refirmatus -- fixed again, re-established
renormatus -- arranged, laid out anew
squammatus -- couvert d'écailles.
toreumatus -- ciselé
aestimatus -- part. passé de aestimo; estimé, prisé, évalué, apprécié, jugé. -- in value, much esteemed
diadematus -- adorned with a diadem
proximatus -- the next place after that of the magister scriniorum, the proximate
reformatus -- part. p. de reformo. -- a transformation
circumclamatus -- part. passé de circumclamo, inusité : qui retentit de mugissements.
arhythmatus -- of unequal measure, inharmonious
conclamatus -- part. passé de conclamo. - 1 - rempli de cris. - 2 - publié, proclamé; célèbre. - 3 - appelé trois fois (on avait coutume d'appeler plusieurs fois le mort à haute voix avant de brûler ou d'enterrer son corps); désespéré, perdu. - 4 - mortel, pernicieux.
concrematus -- part. passé de concremo; brûlé en entier.
confirmatus -- encouraged, confident, courageous, resolute, Established, certain
conformatus -- part. passé de conformo.
consummatus -- - 1 - part. passé de consummo. - 2 - adjt. achevé, accompli.
desquamatus -- part. passé de desquamo; écorcé.
existimatus -- part. passé de existimo. - 1 - jugé, cru, regardé comme. - 2 - Gell. censuré.
inflammatus -- part. passé de inflammo. - 1 - incendié. - 2 - enflammé (t. de méd.). - 3 - enflammé, brûlant, excité, animé.
quadrimatus -- the age of four years
succlamatus -- part. passé de succlamo; qui est l'objet de clameurs.
thymiamatus -- imprégné d'encens, parfumé d'encens.
circumhumatus -- Part, buried around
clarissimatus -- the dignity of a
decemprimatus -- Their dignity
inconsummatus -- unfinished, incomplete, imperfect
transformatus -- part. de transformo.
opobalsamatus -- embaumé
inaestimatus -- not rated, untaxed
praeformatus -- part. p. de praeformo.
semicrematus -- half-burned
arrhythmatus -- dépourvu de rythme, dépourvu d'harmonie.
perfectissimatus -- the rank and station of a, under the later emperors
__medicina
the healing art, medicine, surgery, practising, A remedy, medicine, a remedy, relief, antidote, means of rendering beautiful
mulo/medicina -- the art of curing the diseases of mules
__mellum
a dog's collar
malo/mellum -- sorte de pomme très douce
scamellum -- a little bench, stool, unequal projections, steps
__mestria*
trimestria -- graines qui mûrissent trois mois après l'ensemencement
semestria -- the semi-annual collection of imperial ordinances
__metrus*
tetrametrus -- a verse of four metrical feet, a tetrameter
trimetrus -- containing three metres, double-feet, trimeter
diametrus -- diamétral.
dimetrus -- of two measures, metres
cacometrus -- faulty in metre, unmetrical
__modia
tri/modia -- vase qui contient trois modius ou boisseaux
psalmodia -- psalmodie
__moma
cardimoma -- a pain in the stomach
cinnamoma -- c. cinnamomum.
stomoma -- a kind of fine scales which fly off in hammering
__mulus
a mule
trimulus -- of three years, three years old
aemulus -- striving earnestly after, emulating, rivalling, vying with, emulous, Envious, jealous, grudging, malicious, a rival, rivalling, comparable, similar
cumulus -- a heap, pile, mass, accumulation, of slain, follows with its mass, a mass, accumulation, a surplus, overplus, accession, addition, increase, additional number, as an addition, as the crown of woe
tumulus -- a heap of earth, mound, hill, hillock, A sepulchral mound, barrow, grave, tumulus, a cenotaph
famulus -- serving, serviceable, m., a servant, attendant, a demon attendant, workmen -- serving; serviceable; servile; subject;
bimulus -- only two years old
gemulus -- moaning, complaining
hamulus -- a small hook
limulus -- somewhat askance
mimulus -- a little mime
numulus -- some money, money
ramulus -- a twig, sprig, shoot
remulus -- a small oar
simulus -- flat-nosed, pug-nosed
stimulus -- a prick, goad, kick against the pricks, stakes bearing iron hooks buried in the ground, a spur, incentive, incitement, stimulus, A sting, torment, pain
tremulus -- shaking, quaking, quivering, trembling, tremulous -- tremble (arbre).
animulus -- petit coeur (t. d'affection).
grumulus -- a little hill, hillock
mimmulus -- the name of a plant
nummulus -- a bit of money, coin, for filthy lucre
palmulus -- le contenu du creux de la main, une poignée [comme mesure]
primulus -- the first.
promulus -- facile, coulant ou abondant, riche [en parl. du langage].
confamulus -- a fellow-servant
intremulus -- -I. shaking, tremulous -II. not tremulous
rhythmulus -- Diom. petit rythme (en parl. du trochée).
contremulus -- trembling violently
quadrimulus -- of four years, four years old
subtremulus -- somewhat tremulous
tardingemulus -- slow-moaning
tardigemulus -- slow-moaning
__nalia
quinquennalia -- games celebrated every fifth year
uicennalia -- les Vicennales, fête célébrée après vingt ans de règne d'un empereur
magnalia -- great things, mighty works, words
carnalia -- carnal things
foeminalia -- bandages for the upper part of the thighs, thigh-bandages
decennalia -- les jeux décennaux
irrationalia -- things, creatures without reason
nonalia -- les Nonalies (fêtes religieuses célébrées le jour des nones).
urnalia -- vessels of such capacity
annalia -- 
feminalia -- bandages for the upper part of the thighs, thigh-bandages
iuuenalia -- youthful pursuits, games
nominalia -- the day on which a child received its name, the name-day
seminalia -- standing crops
auctionalia -- catalogues of auction sales, actionalia
septentrionalia -- the northern regions
__nauta*
a sailor, seaman, mariner, boatman
mesonauta -- a seaman who ranked between the pilot and the rowers
archinauta -- Inscr. pilote en chef, chef des matelots.
__notus*
known, of any eminence, customary, familiar accents, in common use, m, acquaintances, friends, Well known, famous, esteemed for, n, notorious facts, Well known, of ill repute, notorious
leuconotus -- the, white, clear, dry, south wind, the south-southwest wind2
euronotus -- the south-southeast wind, that which is between eurus and notus2
malenotus -- peu connu, obscur.
ignotus -- unknown, strange, unrecognized, unfamiliar, of uncertain result, unnoticed, inglorious, m., a stranger, n., unfamiliar themes, Unknown, obscure, without repute, mean, Of low birth, ignoble, low-born, base, vulgar, Unacquainted with, ignorant of
pernotus -- thoroughly known, well known
austronotus -- the south pole2
__ula>
piscinula -- petit vivier, petit bassin.
cenula -- a little dinner
conula -- a plant#
hanula -- c. fanula.#
lanula -- a little wool, a small lock of wool
lunula -- a little moon
penula -- ed#
ranula -- a little frog, a tadpole
urnula -- a little urn, waterpitcher
uenula -- a small vein, veinlet.
zonula -- a little girdle
aruinula -- Vulg. un peu de graisse.
baionula -- lit portatif.
carinula -- petit bateau.
catenula -- a small chain.
coronula -- The ornament on a mitre
dominula -- diminutif de domina.
farinula -- a little meal
habenula -- a small strip of diseased flesh which is cut out from the body
harenula -- fine sand, a grain of sand
murenula -- A small murena
paginula -- a little page
resinula -- a little bit of gum
uaginula -- a little sheath, husk
alumnula -- die kleine Pflegetochter
patenula -- eine kleine Pfanne
pinnula -- a little wing, pinion. &mdash;Plur
spinula -- a little thorn
arenula -- fine sand, a grain of sand
caenula -- a little dinner
cannula -- A small, low reed
coenula -- a little dinner
domnula -- petite femme, épouse.
hinnula -- a young hind
hirnula -- a small jug, pitcher
lamnula -- a little plate of metal
monnula -- a darling
pennula -- d#
planula -- a little plane
uernula -- a little home-born slave, young domestic, of slavish birth under the bank
nonnula -- filet pour prendre les oiseaux
paenula -- a woollen outer garment covering the body, travelling-cloak, mantle
aerumnula -- a traveller's stick for carrying a bundle
cauponula -- a small inn, little tavern
cauernula -- a small cavity
cortinula -- a small kettle
fuscinula -- a small three-pronged fork
gallinula -- a pullet, chicken
lacernula -- a small, a little cloak
lucernula -- a small lamp
machinula -- a little machine
muraenula -- A small murena
sarcinula -- a little pack, small bundle, fardel, dowry
tabernula -- a small booth, shop, a little tavern
concubinula -- petite concubine
membranula -- parchment
__numus*
gen. plur., a piece of money, a coin, money
pentanumus -- a silver coin of the value of five asses
multinumus -- that costs much money, dear, expensive
__nymus*
trionymus -- having three names, triple-named
homonymus -- of the same name, homonymous
anonymus -- anonyme, sans nom, inconnu.
dionymus -- with a double name
dyonymus -- having two names
myrionymus -- with countless names
callionymus -- a sea-fish, also called#
tetraonymus -- qui a quatre noms
__opterus*
phoenicopterus -- the flamingo, red-wing (of water-bird)
percnopterus -- a mountain-stork
__para*
primipara -- she that has brought forth, foaled, whelped, littered, for the first time;
deipara -- she who gives birth to God
cappara -- a plant, also called#
lipara -- an emollient plaster#
gemellipara -- twin-bearing, mother of twins
__parcus*
sparing, frugal, thrifty, economical, niggardly, stingy, penurious, parsimonious, of poverty, Sparing, chary, moderate, moderate, Spare, scanty, little, small, slight
triparcus -- very sparing, stingy, niggardly
deparcus -- excessively sparing, niggardly
praeparcus -- very sparing, very niggardly
__partitus*
P. of partio and of partior
quinquepartitus -- divided into five parts, fivefold, quinquepartite, Adv.
tripartitus -- divided, divisible into three parts, threefold, tripartite, Substt
bipartitus -- divided:
quadripartitus -- divided into four parts, fourfold, quadripartite, fourfold
multipartitus -- much divided, divided into many classes
__patina*
a broad, shallow dish, pan, stewpan, I am thinking of the dishes, a dish large enough
tripatina -- mets formé de trois ingrédients
tyropatina -- a kind of cheesecake
carpatina -- gros soulier.
__patronus*
a protector, defender, patron, The former master, A defender, advocate, pleader
fiscopatronus -- der Vorsteher des Fiskus
compatronus -- a fellow-patron
__peda*
a footstep
centupeda -- a centipede, a worm, called also
milipeda -- millepeda
millepeda -- thousandfeet, the wood-louse, milleped
plumipeda -- der an den Füßen Gefiederte
bipeda -- a tile, flagstone two feet long, for pavements
scrupeda -- hobbling, shambling?
centipeda -- a centipede, a worm, called also
decempeda -- a ten-foot pole, measuring-rod
multipeda -- a multipede
centumpeda -- hundredfooted
scrupipeda -- hobbling, shambling
__pedus*
quadrupedus -- going on four feet, galloping.
bipedus -- Gloss. mesurant deux pieds.
compedus -- fettering, shackling
aequipedus -- Apul. qui a des pieds égaux, qui a des côtés égaux, isocèle.
cornipedus -- qui a des pieds de corne.
fluxipedus -- flowing down to the feet
planipedus -- Cass. de plain-pied.
quadripedus -- going on four feet, galloping.
__pendia
lanipendia -- Inscr. Dig. celle qui pèse la laine (et qui distribue la tâche - pensum - aux ouvrières dans les ateliers impériaux).
impendia -- Inscr. c. impendium.
__pendo*
to suspend, weigh, weigh out, To weigh out in payment, pay, pay out, to pay, suffer, undergo, To weigh, ponder, consider, deliberate upon, decide, To value, esteem, regard, esteem lightly, care nothing for, to weigh, be heavy
magnipendo -- - tr. - estimer beaucoup, faire grand cas de.
expendo -- to weigh out, weigh
rependo -- to weigh back, return by weight
impendo -- to weigh out, lay out, expend
appendo -- to weigh out:
dependo -- Act., to pay
perpendo -- to weigh carefully, examine, ponder, consider
suspendo -- to hang up, hang, suspend, had caught, with satchels hanging on their arms, turn up, To choke to death by hanging, hang, to hang up, dedicate, consecrate, to build on arches, hang, support, prop, propped, to fix, hang, naso, to turn up the nose at, sneer at, to depend, rest, dependent upon externals.&mdash;To hang up, suspend, make uncertain, render doubtful, keep in suspense, To hang up, stay, stop, check, inter rupt, suspend
compendo -- to weigh, balance together
propendo -- c. propendeo.
dispendo -- to stretch out -- to weigh out, dispensed, distributed
uilipendo -- to hold in slight esteem, to depreciate, despise, vilipend?
paruipendo -- 
superimpendo -- to spend, exhaust
__pennae*
cynopennae -- pl., hommes tenant de l'oiseau et du chien
quassatipennae -- feather-shaking
__pertitus*
tripertitus -- divided into three parts, threefold, tripartite
impertitus -- part. passé de impertio.
bipertitus -- part. de bipartio
quadripertitus -- divided into four parts, consisting of four parts, fourfold, quadripartite.
dispertitus -- part. passé de dispertio; distribué.
multipertitus -- vielfältig eingeteilt, vielfältig
quinquepertitus -- in five parts, fivefold
__peta*
lucripeta -- a gainseeker, one fond of lucre
nepeta -- a plant, Italian catnip#
drapeta -- a fugitive slave, runaway#
otopeta -- longear, hare#
cornupeta -- comm., pushing, goring with the horns
agripeta -- a colonist, one who seeks land to cultivate
altipeta -- comm., aspiring, high-flying, med.
lucipeta -- qui recherche la lumière.
oclopeta -- animal comestible inconnu (selon les auteurs corbeau, grue, bécasse, lièvre, crabe ou seiche...) d'étymologie encore discutée#
heredipeta -- one that strives after an inheritance, a legacy-hunter
honoripeta -- striving for honors, ambitious
__phaerum*
mesosphaerum -- a kind of nard with middle-sized leaves
hadrosphaerum -- a kind of spikenard with large leaves
microsphaerum -- small-leaved nard
pentasphaerum -- Dig. une plante aromatique.
__phago*
a glutton, gormandizer
saprophago -- to eat putrid meat
sarcophago -- - tr. - 1 - ensevelir. - 2 - Fort. enfermer (fig.).
__pharmacum*
drogue (médicament ou poison).
pentapharmacum -- a meal consisting of five dishes
tetrapharmacum -- A plaster composed of four ingredients, med.
__pherna*
parapherna -- the separate possessions of a married woman, her property besides her dower
antipherna -- the return-present which the bridegroom brought to the bride
__philus*
beloved
dysphilus -- odieux.
__phori*
tetraphori -- gens qui portent à quatre
pastophori -- a kind of priests who carried about the images of their deities in a little shrine for the purpose of collecting alms
hexaphori -- six porteurs (pour porter le même fardeau).
__phthisicus*
consumptive, phthisical
haemophthisicus -- a person with corrupted blood
__phyllum*
melisphyllum -- balm-gentle, balm
arctophyllum -- cerfeuil.
chaerephyllum -- chervil
__pictus*
painted, colored, variegated, of various colors, decorated, Tattooed, adorned, ornamented, ornate, unreal
tripictus -- written three times
acupictus -- brodé.?
depictus -- P. of depingo
expictus -- P. of expingo
superpictus -- part. p. de superpingo.
__pilatus*
part. passé de pilo ( 1 ); dégarni de poils, chauve.
armed with javelins
primipilatus -- the office of chief centurion of the, the primipilate
depilatus -- part. passé de depilo : - a - épilé, plumé, pelé. - b - au fig. plumé, volé, dupé.
compilatus -- - 1 - dépouillé, pillé, dévalisé. - 2 - broyé, battu, roué de coups.
propilatus -- lancé comme un javelot.
praepilatus -- tipped with a ball, carrying a button, blunied -- lancé
expapilatus -- découvert jusqu'à laisser voir le sein.#
__pilus
a maniple of the triarii, company of veteran reserves, the first centurion of the triarii, chief centurion of a legion
primipilus -- the first centurion of the triarii, promote to be
raripilus -- thinhaired
alipilus -- slave who plucked the hair from armpits of bathers;?
caupilus -- v. caupulus.#
mespilus -- nèfle, néflier.?
pompilus -- a sea-fish, pilotfish, rudder-fish#
__plana*
a plane
pedeplana -- rooms on the ground-floor
__plastus*
fictitious, deceptive
primoplastus -- the first - created
protoplastus -- the first man;, the first men
__pleurus*
tetrapleurus -- qui a quatre côtés
polypleurus -- qui a beaucoup de côtés
__plicatus
part. de plico.
triplicatus -- part. passé de triplico.
applicatus -- attached, close, annexed, inclined, directed, inclined to self-love
duplicatus -- part. passé de duplico. - 1 - doublé, double. - 2 - ployé en deux.
implicatus -- entangled, involved, confused
replicatus -- part. passé de replico.
explicatus -- spread out, Well ordered, Plain, clear, Assured, certain -- an unfolding, exposition
circumplicatus -- part. de circumplico.
complicatus -- (Lebaigue P. 247 et P. 248) part. passé de complico; plié, roulé.
displicatus -- scattered, dispersed
perplicatus -- interlaced, entangled.
centuplicatus -- increased a hundredfold, centuple, Subst.
decemplicatus -- multiplied by ten, ten times over
multiplicatus -- part. passé de multiplico.
perexplicatus -- wholly completed
resimplicatus -- doubled
inexplicatus -- unexplained
octiplicatus -- enth
octuplicatus -- multiplied by eight, octupled
reduplicatus -- doubled again, redoubled, reduplicated
contortiplicatus -- compliqué, entortillé.
contortuplicatus -- entangled, complicated
__plico
to fold, wind, coil, coiling up
quadruplico -- to multiply by four, make fourfold, quadruplicate, one's property
duplico -- to double, multiply by two, repeat, to compound, To double, enlarge, augment, increase, To double up, bow, bend
explico -- to unfold, uncoil, unroll, unfurl, unclose, spread out, loosen, undo
applico -- to join, connect, attach, add:
implico -- to infold, involve, entangle, entwine, inwrap, envelop, encircle, embrace, clasp, grasp
deplico -- - tr. - déployer.
replico -- to fold back, bend back, unroll, open
supplico -- to kneel down, humble oneself, pray humbly, beseech, beg, implore, supplicate, to pray, supplicate, worship
complico -- to fold together, fold up:
displico -- to scatter
simplico -- to make single, simple
terplico -- v. triplico.
triplico -- to multiply by three, to treble, triple, med.
multiplico -- to multiply, increase, augment, enlarged
centuplico -- to increase a hundredfold
conduplico -- to double:
interplico -- to fold, plait between, to interweave, to surround
subexplico -- tr., déployer en dessous
octiplico -- - tr. - multiplier par huit.
reduplico -- wieder verdoppeln
circumplico -- to wind around:
quincuplico -- - tr. - Boet. quintupler.
quintuplico -- 
quinquiplico -- to make fivefold
commultiplico -- tr., multiplier l'un par l'autre
__podes*
struthopodes -- Plin. qui ont des pieds de moineaux, qui ont de petits pieds.
tripodes -- e mX
antipodes -- the antipodes, banqueters
hamaxopodes -- roues de chariot.
__polita*
metropolita -- a bishop in a chief city, a metropolitan
tyrannopolita -- a citizen of a town ruled by a tyrant
__pontus
the sea
medipontus -- a kind of thick rope
__portentum*
a sign, token, omen, portent, A monster, monstrosity, A marvellous fiction, extravagance, absurdity, a monster, demon
triportentum -- an extraordinary omen, portent
__praefectus*
an overseer, director, superintendent, a president, superintendent, commander, governor, deputy, governor of the province, admiral, commander, chief engineer, colonels of cavalry, commanders of armies
done beforehand
uicepraefectus -- - 1 - Inscr. vice-préfet (du prétoire, de l'Italie...). - 2 - Inscr. lieutenant d'un corps).
suppraefectus -- an under-prefect
propraefectus -- a vice-prefect
expraefectus -- 
__prunum*
a plum
nuciprunum -- a plum grafted on a nut-tree, a nut-plum
__ptota*
pentaptota -- nouns that have five cases, pentaptotes
tetraptota -- words which occur in only four cases, tetraptotes
triptota -- nouns, that have only three cases, triptotes
diptota -- nouns that have only two cases, diptotes
hexaptota -- nouns that have six cases
monoptota -- nouns which have but one case-ending, monoptotes
__ptycha*
polyptycha -- accountbooks, registers
diptycha -- A writing-tablet of two leaves
__pulus
quadrupulus -- fourfold, quadruple, Subst.
manipulus -- a handful, bundle, bundles of hay, a company, maniple, one third of a cohort, forces, a band
crispulus -- curled, having curled hair, crisped, crimped
scrupulus -- a sharp bit of stone, uneasiness, difficulty, trouble, anxiety, doubt, restlessness, scruple
crespulus -- du point du jour
capulus -- that which is grasped, a handle, holder, The hilt of a sword
pupulus -- a little boy
populus -- a poplar-tree, the silver-poplar -- a people, nation, republics and kingdoms, the whole body of citizens, people, the public treasury, The citizens, A region, district, A multitude, host, crowd, throng, great number, the street
pipulus -- a peeping, piping, chirping;
scopulus -- a projecting point of rock, rock, cliff, crag, shelf, ledge
campulus -- petit coin de terre.
caupulus -- a kind of small ship
crepulus -- rattling, resounding, crashing
lippulus -- somewhat blear-eyed
stipulus -- firm
discipulus -- a learner, scholar, pupil, disciple, student, follower, Have the pupils forgotten
condiscipulus -- a school - mate, fellowpupil:
interscapulus -- entre les épaules.
commanipulus -- compagnon d'armes.
__quaestura*
the office of quaestor, quaestorship, The quaestor's chest, public funds
uicequaestura -- sous-questure, office de sous-questeur.
__rhythmus*
tetrarhythmus -- formé de quatre mesures
trirhythmus -- formé de trois pieds
dirhythmus -- composé de deux rythmes
__rotinus*
paederotinus -- de la couleur de la pierre dite paederos
serotinus -- that comes, happens late, late-ripe, late, backward#
oxypaederotinus -- opal-colored
__sanctus*
consecrated, established as inviolable, sacred, inviolable, in the special treasury, reserved for extreme necessity, Venerable, august, divine, sacred, pure, holy, Pure, good, innocent, pious, holy, just, conscientious, upright, chaste
Sanctus (surnom).
sacrosanctus -- consecrated with religious ceremonies, most holy, sacred, inviolable
insanctus -- unholy
persanctus -- very sacred, holy
sacersanctus -- c. sacrosanctus.
__sarca*
Inscr. chair.
philosarca -- a lover of the flesh
__scopium*
horoscopium -- an instrument used in the casting of nativities
episcopium -- épiscopat, évêché.
catascopium -- a lookoutship, a spy-ship, a vessel sent out to reconnoitre
__selinum*
renoncule
petroselinum -- rock-parsley
oleoselinum -- a plant resembling parsley
oreoselinum -- mountain-parsley
hydroselinum -- marsh selinum
buselinum -- a plant, ox-parsley
pseudoselinum -- a plant, bastard-selinum
__semus*
incomplet
quadrisemus -- quadrisyllabic, containing four, prosodial times
tetrasemus -- of four syllables, quadrisyllabic
trisemus -- containing three syllabic times, one long and one short syllable
decasemus -- qui vaut dix temps (t. de métr.).
hexasemus -- qui a six temps [en métrique].
octasemus -- containing eight times
polysemus -- having many significations
disemus -- dissyllabic
duodecasemus -- qui a douze temps.
__somum*
quadrisomum -- Inscr. (tombeau) qui contient quatre corps.
trisomum -- sarcophage pour trois corps
bisomum -- a sarcophagus for two persons
__sonorus*
noisy, loud, resounding, sonorous;
dulcisonorus -- sweetly sounding
dissonorus -- dissonant
multisonorus -- loud-sounding
__sonus*
a noise, sound, the highest treble . . . the lowest bass, utter emply sounds, tone, character, style
sounding, resounding
a noise, sound
unisonus -- qui a le même son, de son uniforme
aegisonus -- sounding with the &oelig;gis?
aerisonus -- sounding with bronze
altisonus -- of lofty sound
armisonus -- resounding with arms
iurisonus -- resounding with justice, pronouncing judgment
omnisonus -- uttering all kinds of sounds
semisonus -- qui a la moitié du son [d'une voyelle].
undisonus -- wave-sounding, sea-gods
absonus -- deviating from the right tone, discordant, inharmonious:
insonus -- without sound, noiseless, silent
resonus -- resounding, re-echoing -- resonance; a resounding
bisonus -- sounding twice
assonus -- qui fait accord avec
consonus -- sounding together, harmonious, accordant, fil, suitable
dissonus -- dissonant, discordant, confused
personus -- resounding, ringing
raucisonus -- hoarsesounding?
aequisonus -- Boet. qui rend le même son.
astrisonus -- sounding with the stars
bellisonus -- sounding of war
bombisonus -- bourdonnant
clarisonus -- clear-sounding, loud
doctisonus -- skilfully sounding
dulcisonus -- sweetly sounding
grauisonus -- having a deep, heavy sound
horrisonus -- resounding terribly
hymnisonus -- singing hymns, singing praises
inconsonus -- dissonant, qui manque d'harmonie.
luctisonus -- sad-sounding, doleful?
multisonus -- loud-sounding
suauisonus -- sweet-sounding?
terrisonus -- sounding terribly
magnisonus -- loud-sounding
circumsonus -- sounding around, filling with sound:
fluctisonus -- wave-resounding, roaring with waves
grandisonus -- high-sounding
ronchisonus -- v. rhonchinosus.?
conchisonus -- qui sonne de la conque marine.
psalmisonus -- a psalm-singer
fluentisonus -- waveresounding
rhonchisonus -- snorting
__sophia*
wisdom
philosophia -- philosophy, love of wisdom;
__sophicus
sophistique.
philosophicus -- of or belonging to philosophy, philosophic, Adv.
__statura
height, size, stature
lanistatura -- the profession of a
__stega*
the deck
tristega -- third stories, floors
__stibulum
nau/stibulum -- a vessel shaped like a ship
prostibulum -- A prostitute
__stichus*
tetrastichus -- de quatre vers / de quatre rangs
distichus -- consisting of two rows.
hexastichus -- of six lines, rows, long-eared barley
__strophus*
the bellyache, gripes, colic
tetrastrophus -- de quatre strophes
antistrophus -- réciproque
__strotum*
lithostrotum -- mosaicwork
optostrotum -- a brick pavement?
__stylum*
tetrastylum -- tétrastyle, galerie à quatre colonnes ou quatre rangs de colonnes
peristylum -- an open court surrounded by a colonnade, peristyle
__sulcus*
a furrow, A trench, ditch, A track, furrow, wake, trail
an unknown species of fig-tree
trisulcus -- with three furrows, three-cleft, three-forked, trifid, triple, forked lightning
dissulcus -- (porc) dont les soies sont partagées sur la tête.
bisulcus -- having two furrows, forked, cloven:
disulcus -- [porc] dont les soies sont partagées sur la tête
quadrisulcus -- divisé en quatre lobes
__syllabus*
a list, register, syllabus
quadrisyllabus -- Aug. qui a quatre syllabes.
tetrasyllabus -- de quatre syllabes
trisyllabus -- of three syllables, trisyllabic
unisyllabus -- monosyllabe
bisyllabus -- dissyllabic
disyllabus -- dissyllabic, Plur., subst.
brachysyllabus -- pied de trois brèves, tribraque.
isosyllabus -- parisyllabique
unasyllabus -- of one syllable
heptasyllabus -- seven - syllabled
decasyllabus -- qui a dix syllabes.
hexasyllabus -- qui a six syllabes.
monosyllabus -- monosyllabic, subst., a monosyllable
octosyllabus -- having eight syllables, octosyllabic
polysyllabus -- qui est polysyllabe
duodecasyllabus -- de douze syllabes.
hendecasyllabus -- hendécasyllabe [vers de onze syllabes].
__terna
nasiterna -- a large watering-pot with a large nose, spout
nassiterna -- a large watering-pot with a large nose, spout
interna -- Interior parts
laterna -- a lantern, lamp, torch
cisterna -- a cistern (for water), Ta.
basterna -- a sedan chair, litter, enclosed on all sides, and carried by mules
fusterna -- the upper part, knotty part of a fir - tree
lanterna -- a lantern, lamp, torch
santerna -- borax, mountaingreen
texterna -- Apul. atelier de tisserand.
__ternatus
nasiternatus -- pourvu de nasiterne.
nassiternatus -- provided with a large-nosed watering-pot
alternatus -- part. passé de alterno. - alterné, disposé alternativement.
internatus -- part. passé de internascor; né au milieu.
consternatus -- part. passé de consterno, āre. - 1 - abattu (au fig.), épouvanté. - 2 - soulevé, poussé à la révolte.
__theca*
that in which any thing is enclosed, an envelope, hull, cover, case, sheath
pinacotheca -- a picture-gallery
entheca -- A store
zotheca -- A little private chamber, closet, cabinet?
oporotheca -- Varr. fruitier, fruiterie.?
apotheca -- a repository, storehouse, magazine, warehouse, C.; esp. for wine, H.
epitheca -- an addition, increase
hypotheca -- a pledge, security
bibliotheca -- a library, room for books:
dactyliotheca -- A casket to keep rings in, title?
__trina*
lauatrina -- - 1 - Varr. salle de bain. - 2 - Varr. latrines.
sutrina -- A shoemaker's shop, cobbler's stall?
latrina -- - 1 - salle de bain. - 2 - latrines (lieux d'aisances). - 3 - lieu de débauche, maison de débauche, lupanar, bordel.
ustrina -- A burning, burn#
accipitrina -- hawkweed#
doctrina -- teaching, instruction, learning, a lesson, Science, erudition, learning#
pistrina -- a bakehouse, bakery
textrina -- a weaver's shop
austrina -- the southern regions of a country#
furatrina -- a stealing, theft#
moletrina -- a mill?
tonstrina -- a barber's shop
uoratrina -- An eatinghouse?
__trophus*
limitotrophus -- lands set apart to furnish subsistence to the troops stationed on the frontiers
limitrophus -- lands set apart to furnish subsistence to the troops stationed on the frontiers
syntrophus -- that has been brought up with another
orphanotrophus -- a bringer-up of orphans, a fosterfather of orphans
monotrophus -- celui qui vit seul, un solitaire.
brephotrophus -- one who brings up foundlings
ptochotrophus -- an overseer of the poor, in lemm.?
antistrophus -- réciproque#
__turgus
melitturgus -- a bee-keeper
liturgus -- one who fills a public office, a servant of the state
__uagus*
strolling, rambling, roving, roaming, wandering, unfixed, unsettled, vagrant, flying, wandering, wavering, unsteady, inconstant, doubtful, uncertain, vague, aimless, indefinite, irregular, promiscuous
noctiuagus -- night-wandering, that wanders by night
nubiuagus -- wandering among the clouds
paludiuagus -- wandering about, among morasses?
aeriuagus -- Chalcid. errant dans les airs.
altiuagus -- qui erre dans les airs.
gyrouagus -- errant.
igniuagus -- spreading like fire, like wild-fire
ludiuagus -- sportive
omniuagus -- roving everywhere
remiuagus -- oar-wafted, impelled by oars
soliuagus -- wandering in solitude, roving alone, selfmoving, isolated, narrow
undiuagus -- wandering in waves
peruagus -- wandering about
areniuagus -- wandering over sands
montiuagus -- wandering over mountains
multiuagus -- that wanders about much
mundiuagus -- wandering in the world
pontiuagus -- roaming over the sea; subst., one who sails over the sea, a voyager, navigator
uolgiuagus -- that wanders about everywhere, roving, rambling, vagrant; inconstant?
uulgiuagus -- that wanders about everywhere, roving, rambling, vagrant; inconstant?
circumuagus -- wandering about, flowing around:
fluctiuagus -- driven about by the waves
hareniuagus -- wandering over sands
lustriuagus -- errant dans les lieux sauvages.?
nemoriuagus -- wandering in the woods?
__uidus
nocti/uidus -- night-seeing; that sees by night;
languidus -- faint, weak, dull, sluggish, languid, languishing, sluggish, gentle, while our troops grew weaker, more mellow, Weakening, faint, feeble, powerless, inactive, listless, sluggish#
im/pauidus -- fearless, undaunted, intrepid, unterrified#
ex/pauidus -- terrified greatly
ninguidus -- full of snow, snowy
prae/uidus -- prévoyant.
fluidus -- flowing, fluid, moist, Soft, slack, lax, languid, decomposing#
pauidus -- trembling, quaking, fearful, timid, timorous, shy, startled out of her sleep, in terror lest, Neut, timorously, Making timorous#
uiuidus -- full of life, lively, vigorous, vivid, life-like#
inuidus -- envious, envying, an envious person, hater, unfavorable
diuidus -- separated
liuidus -- of a leaden color, bluish, blue, Black and blue, livid, bruised, Making livid, deadly, envious, invidious, spiteful, malicious, destructive of praise
rauidus -- grayish, dark-colored
feruidus -- glowing, burning, fiery, fervid, sultry, raging, glowing, fiery, hot, vehement, impetuous, violent, hasty
fluuidus -- flowing, fluid, moist, Soft, slack, lax, languid, decomposing
grauidus -- laden, filled, full, swollen, fruit-laden, loaded, Burdened, pregnant, with child, with young
liquidus -- flowing, fluid, liquid, liquid unguents, fountain-nymphs, a voyage, n., water, Clear, bright, transparent, limpid, pure, serene way, clear, pure, flowing, continuing without interruption, Unmixed, unadulterated
flauidus -- of a golden yellow, yellowish
fuluidus -- Cassiod. roux, jaunâtre.
pro/uidus -- foreseeing, prescient, Caring for, provident, Cautious, circumspect, provident, prudent
suauidus -- agréable (au goût).
toruidus -- wild, fierce
impro/uidus -- not foreseeing, off guard
clari/uidus -- seeing clearly, clear-sighted
elanguidus -- utterly weary
multi/uidus -- much-seeing
sub/liuidus -- somewhat blue, bluish, med.
pseudo/liquidus -- apparently liquid
per/liquidus -- very liquid
stulti/uidus -- simple-sighted, that sees things in a foolish light
irredi/uidus -- qu'on ne peut pas faire revivre.
prae/feruidus -- very hot, Fierce
prae/grauidus -- very heavy, ponderous
__uigilus*
noctiuigilus -- night-watching
noctuuigilus -- night-watching
__ultimus*
farthest, most distant, most remote, uttermost, extreme, last, the most remote part of the province, farthest Africa, m, the most remote people, those farthest on, n., what is farthest, the most remote, the last, the end, the goal, remotest, earliest, oldest, first, last, latest, final, last, n, the end, to the end, at last, lastly, finally, illud, now for the last time, utmost, extreme, highest, first, greatest, capital punishment, n., any extremity, to the extreme, in the highest degree, utterly, to the last degree, Lowest, meanest
penultimus -- the last but one
paenultimus -- the last but one
antepaenultimus -- antépénultième.
__umuiri*
triumuiri -- three men holding an office together, associated in public business, a board of three, three joint commissioners, a triumvirate.
duumuiri -- a Roman board, court consisting of two persons.
centumuiri -- 
__ximus
medioximus -- In the middle, middlemost, between gods and men
maximus -- large, great, big, high, tall, long, broad, extensive, spacious, inundations, by half, statelier, too large for, great, large, abundant, considerable, much, the victor's spoils, the majority, more numerous, increased my estate, great, large, considerable, was highly esteemed, esteems highly, dearer, most valuable, prized most highly, at no high price, cost him dear, strong, powerful, vehement, loud, great, long, extended, the Platonic cycle of the heavens.&mdash;Early, high, long past, aged, through old age, original, aged, old, advanced, elder, eldest, elders, elder, the oldest, the elder, more than forty years old, m, the fathers, ancestors, ancients, men of old, great, noble, grand, mighty, important, weighty, momentous, important business, weighty, significant, impressive, enterprise, n., a great thing, loftily, of everything magnificent, great, high, eminent, powerful, one of your great friends, chief, associate with superiors, great, elevated, noble, lofty, above, greater than those criticised, thorough-paced, great, severe, strong, intense, more heinous, magnify, be exaggerated, Proud, boastful, lofty, assuming
proximus -- the nearest, next, next neighbor, most direct, adjoining, close, next to the last, m., those nearest, their nearest neighbors, n., the neighborhood, vicinity, nearest place, next door, adjoining districts, the previous, last, latest, most recent, The next, following, ensuing, coming, on the next night, the next, we must next inquire, the next point is, the next, nearest, most like, next best, nearest the truth, the nearest, next, closest, next of kin, most like, guilty, m., a near relation, next of kin, Most devoted, most faithful -- a neighbor, a fellow-man, subst.
permaximus -- very great indeed, extremely great, Adv.
paracharaximus -- counterfeit
__xumus
medioxumus -- In the middle, middlemost, between gods and men
proxumus -- the nearest, next, next neighbor, most direct, adjoining, close, next to the last, m., those nearest, their nearest neighbors, n., the neighborhood, vicinity, nearest place, next door, adjoining districts, the previous, last, latest, most recent, The next, following, ensuing, coming, on the next night, the next, we must next inquire, the next point is, the next, nearest, most like, next best, nearest the truth, the nearest, next, closest, next of kin, most like, guilty, m., a near relation, next of kin, Most devoted, most faithful
__zontes
monazontes -- monks
hyacinthizontes -- hyacinth-colored
zzz
__calli
calliblepharum -- a dye for coloring the eyebrows
callitrix -- capillaire (plante utilisée pour teindre les cheveux).
callion -- a plant
calligo -- a thick atmosphere, a mist, vapor, fog
callidus -- practised, shrewd, expert, experienced, adroit, skilful, ingenious, prudent, dexterous, a connoisseur, Crafty, cunning, artful, sly, calculating, subtle
callicia -- a plant that, made water freeze
callimus -- a kind of eagle-stone
callisco -- to become dull, insensible
callicum -- s.-ent. jus), [peut-être altération de callaicum] sauce verte, [couleur de l'or callaïque]
calliditas -- shrewdness, skill, readiness, aptness, Cunning, craft, slyness, artfulness, rogueries
callidulus* -- a little cunning, sly
calligonon -- a plant, also called
callipygis -- Hor. callipyge, qui a de belles fesses.
callithrix -- A plant used for coloring the hair, also called
calliculus -- petit sentier
callionymus* -- a sea-fish, also called
callipetalon -- a plant
callitrichon -- capillaire [plante]
callitrichos -- a plant, commonly called, maidenhair
callistruthia -- une figue (appréciée des oiseaux).
callistruthis -- a very delicate kind of figs, which sparrows were fond of
calliblepharium -- a dye for coloring the eyebrows
calliblepharatus -- with beautiful eyelids
__cardi
cardimoma -- a pain in the stomach
cardimona -- douleur d'estomac.
cardineus -- of or pertaining to a door - hinge
cardiacus -- of the heart, of the pit of the stomach: -- one who has heart-burn, stomach-ache
cardino -- tr., attribuer (un clerc) à une église
cardiace -- affection cardiaque
cardinalis -- of or pertaining to a door-hinge
cardinatus -- hinged, mortised to
cardinulus -- eine kleine Türangel
__carmina
carminabundus -- versifying
carminatio -- a carding
carminator -- a carder
carminatus -- part. de carmino 1 et 2.
__carro
carrobalista -- a ballista mounted on a carriage
carroco -- a sea-fish, a sturgeon
carroballista* -- a ballista mounted on a carriage
carrocarpentarius -- der Wagenmacher
__casa
a small house, cottage, hut, cabin, shed, to build baby-houses, run beyond the hiding-place
casabundus -- a, ready to fall, tottering
casanicus -- Inscr. de la ferme.
casales -- Grom. limites de la ferme, de la propriété.
casalia -- Grom. limites de la ferme, de la propriété.
casalis -- Grom. relatif à la ferme.
casarius -- of or belonging to a cottage;, substt.
__cata*
catalepticus -- cataleptic
catabasis -- a going down, descent, the name of a ceremonial at the festival of the Magna Mater
catacumba -- catacombs
catalexis -- fin d'un vers catalectique
catalogus* -- an enumeration, a list of names, a catalogue
catalysis -- clôture des hostilités, paix?
catanance -- a plant used in magical love potions#
catapulta -- an engine for hurling missiles, catapult:
cataracta -- a drawbridge, portcullis, L.?
catarrhus -- a flowing down, the catarrh, rheum
catasceua -- the confirmation of an assumption?
catastema -- position, situation, condition
catatonus -- stretching down, depressed
catabulum* -- écurie, remise?
catachana -- a tree inoculated with buds of different fruit-trees#
catabolum -- Gloss. écurie, remise.?
catasta -- a scaffold, on which slaves were exposed for sale, Tb.#
cataegis -- a violent storm of wind, a hurricane, whirlwind?
cataplus -- a landing:
cataplasma -- poultice; plaster; -- cataplasme
catachanna -- a tree inoculated with buds of different fruit-trees#
catachysis -- N.-Tir. aiguière (un vase).
cataclista -- Tert. habit de fête, habit de gala (qu'on garde enfermé sous clé).
catadromus -- a rope for rope-dancers
catagrapha -- profile paintings, side views
catalectus -- catalectique (nom donné à un vers dont le dernier pied est incomplet).
catalepsis -- a sudden attack of sickness, catalepsy
catalepton -- titre d'un recueil de poésies attribuées à Virgile
cataphagas -- a glutton, gormandizer
cataphasis -- an affirmation
cataplasmo -- to apply a poultice to
cataplexis -- stupeur; admiration, extase.
catapotium -- pilule.
catascopus -- bâtiment de découverte, aviso
catastroma -- pont d'un navire
catarracta -- a waterfall, in gen.; the waterfalls of the Euphrates
catachresis -- an improper use of a word;
cataclysmos -- A deluge, flood, inundation
catagraphus* -- painted, variegated:
cataphracta -- a coat of mail furnished with iron scales
catapirates -- the sounding-lead
cataractria -- a word coined to designate a kind of spice
catarrhosus -- catarrheux.
catascopium* -- a lookoutship, a spy-ship, a vessel sent out to reconnoitre
catastropha -- - 1 - changement, vicissitude, catastrophe. - 2 - péripétie (au théâtre).
cataclistus -- prächtig
cataphracte -- 
cataphracti -- mailed soldiers
catarractes -- a waterfall, in gen.; the waterfalls of the Euphrates
catastatice -- a plant
catabolensis -- conducteur de bêtes de somme.
catabulensis -- conducteur de bêtes de somme.
catalecticus -- catalectique (nom donné à un vers dont le dernier pied est incomplet).
catapeirates -- v. catapi-.
cataphractes -- a coat of mail with iron scales, Ta.
cataphractus -- mailed, wearing coats of mail.&mdash;Plur. m., mailed soldiers, L., Pr.
catabolenses -- die Frachter
catastactice -- 
catastaltice -- renoncule scélérate
cataclisticus -- of a state dress, med.
cataplectatio -- reproche
catapultarius -- belonging to the catapult, that is thrown by it
catastalticum -- un astringent.
catastalticus -- restraining, checking, absol.
cataphractarius -- mailed, clad in mail
__cena
a dinner, principal meal (anciently taken at noon, afterwards later):
cenacellum -- petite salle à manger
cenaculum* -- an upper story, upper room, garret, attic, his hired garret
cenaticus -- of/pertaining to (a) dinner;
cenaticum -- the money given instead of food, commutation money
cenatoria -- dinner dress
cenaturio -- to have an appetite for dinner
cenatio -- a dining-room, have a sunny exposure
cenator -- a diner, guest
cenatus -- P. of ceno
cenalis -- zur Mahlzeit gehörig
cenarius -- einer, der eine Mahlzeit zubereitet
cenatorius -- of/used for dining; pertaining to dinner or the table;
cenatorium -- a dining-room
cenacularia -- a leasing of a garret
cenaculatus -- with garrets
cenatiuncula -- a small dining-room
cenacularius -- pertaining to a garret;, subst. -- a tenant of a garret
__centu
centu/peda -- a centipede, a worm, called also
centu/muir -- panel of (about 100) judges chosen annually to decide civil suits (pl.);
centu/plex -- a hundredfold
centu/plus -- hundredfold, centuple, subst.
centussis -- a hundred.
centu/plum -- a hundredfold
centuria -- a division of a hundred, century, company, A division of the people, century, A division of land, tract
centurio -- a commander of a century, captain, centurion, of the first maniple, the first centurion of the legion, the six centurions of the first cohort -- to divide into centuries, assign to companies, organize
centumpeda* -- hundredfooted
centumuiri* -- 
centunclum -- Diocl. housse de cheval.
centuplico* -- to increase a hundredfold
centunculum* -- Diocl. housse de cheval.
centunculus -- a cloth of many colors
centurialis -- pertaining to a century.
centuriatio -- a dividing into centuries.
centurionus -- the commander of a century, a captain, centurion
centuriatus -- divided into centuries, the assembled centuries of the people, sanctioned by the Comitia Centuriata -- a division into centuries / the office of centurion
centu/pondium -- a weight of a hundred pounds
centu/plicata -- a hundredfold
centurionatus -- an election of centurions
centum/pondium -- a weight of a hundred pounds
centumuiralis -- of the centumviri
centuplicatus* -- increased a hundredfold, centuple, Subst.
centurionicus -- de centurion
__cepha
cephalaeota -- a collector of a capitation tax
cephalaea -- a continued pain in the head, a lasting headache
cephalote -- having a head
cephalo -- a palmtree
cephalus -- chevesne (poisson à grosse tête).
cephalaeum -- la tête.
cephalicum -- emplâtre pour les maux de tête
cephalicus -- of or relating to the head, head-
cephalaeon -- der Kopf
cepha/lalgia -- a headache
cepha/largia -- a headache
cepha/lalgicus -- sick with a headache
cephalargicus* -- sick with a headache
__cere
cerebellum -- brain; seat of senses/intellect; little brain (L+S);
cereuisia -- beer
cerebrum* -- the brain, Understanding, Anger, choler, your hot temper
cerealia -- les céréales.
cereolus -- of the color of wax -- petit cierge
cerealis -- relatif à l'agriculture, relatif au blé, relatif au pain.
cereus -- waxen, of wax, offered for sale in, a statue of, wax, honeycomb, realms of bees, Wax-colored, Pliant, soft, easily persuaded -- a wax-light, taper
cerebrosus -- hot-headed, passionate, hasty
cereofalum -- die Kerze
cerebellare -- a brain-covering, a head-covering;
__choro
chorographus -- one who describes countries, a geographer
chorobates -- an instrument for finding the level of water, a ground-level
choro/citharista -- he who accompanied the chorus on the cithara
choro/citharistes -- Suet. musicien qui accompagne le choeur avec la cithare.
choro/citharistria -- joueuse de cithare.
__christi
christigenus -- Prud. de la famille du Christ.
christi/fer -- Aug. qui porte le Christ.
christi/colus -- Fort. qui honore le Christ.
__chryso*
chrysoberullus -- béryl doré (pierre précieuse).
chrysopis -- a precious variety of our topaz#
chrysocome -- chrysocome, serpolet.
chrysolago -- arroche (plante).
chrysocalis -- a plant, also called#
chrysocolla -- Mountain - green, copper - green, borax.
chrysocomes -- aux cheveux d'or (épithète d'Apollon).
chrysomelum -- a kind of quince
chrysophrys -- a sea-fish with a golden spot over each eye, O.
chrysocarpus -- lierre à baies jaunes.
chrysococcus -- having golden grains
chrysolampis -- a precious stone
chrysolithos -- chrysolite, topaz, O
chrysomallus -- Hyg. bélier à la toison d'or.
chrysoprasis -- chrysoprase (pierre précieuse).
chrysoprasos -- chrysoprase [pierre précieuse]
chrysopteros -- a kind of jasper
chrysopastus -- a species of our topaz
chrysouellus -- à la toison d'or
chrysolithus -- de chrysolithe
chrysoaspides -- a kind of soldiers under Alexander Severus
chrysocanthos -- a kind of ivy which bears gold-colored berries
chrysomelinum -- Col. pomme d'or, coing.
chrysomelinus* -- 
chrysoberyllus -- chrysoberyl
chrysocephalos -- a golden basilisk
chrysolachanum -- garden orach, called also
chrysographatus* -- inlaid with gold
__cyno*
cynopennae -- pl., hommes tenant de l'oiseau et du chien
cynocauma -- the heat of the dog-days
cynomazon -- dog - bread, a plant
cynozolon -- a plant, called also, and
cynorroda -- The dog-rose
cynodon -- having pairs of projecting teeth
cynodus -- hundszähnig, mit Raffzähnen versehen - Hundszunge
cynomyia -- the herb fleabane
cynops -- a plant, dog's-eye
cynomorion -- a, plant, broom-rape, also called
cynophanes -- men with dogs' heads
cynorrhoda -- c. cynorrhodon.
cynosbatos -- The dog-rose, wild-brier
cynosdexia -- a sea-polypus
cynorrodon -- The dog-rose
cynoglossos -- hound's-tongue, a plant
cynorrhodon -- - 1 - églantier. - 2 - lis rouge.
cynosorchis -- hound's-cod, a plant
cynocardamon -- a kind of
cynocephalia -- tête-de-chien (plante).
cynocephalus -- an ape with a dog's head
cynocephalea -- 
cynocephalion -- dog's-head, a magical plant, called also
__dulci
dulci/sonorus -- sweetly sounding
dulci/fer -- containing sweetness, sweet
dulciola -- little sugar-cakes
dulcitas -- sweetness, pleasantness
dulcium -- gâteau, v. dulcia
dulcifico -- to sweeten
dulcitudo -- sweetness
dulcisapa -- sorte de vin doux
dulciculus -- sweetish
dulci/fluus -- dont les eaux sont douces.
dulc/imodus -- sweetly modulated
dulcisonus* -- sweetly sounding
dulciarium -- friandise, confiserie
dulcilocus* -- dont le son est doux, harmonieux.
dulciarius -- of confections, making sweetmeats, to hold -- a pastry-cook
dulci/loquus -- sweetly speaking
dulcineruis -- sweetly-stringed
dulciore/locus* -- speaking with a sweet mouth
dulciore/loquus -- dont la parole est douce.
__dys
dys/philus -- odieux.
dys/colus -- of a bad temper, peevish, irritable
dys/pnoea -- a difficulty of breathing
dysosmos -- germandrée aquatique (plante).
dyspar -- v. dispar
dys/eros -- loving unfortunately
dys/uria -- retention of urine, dysury
dys/crasia -- mauvais tempérament.
dys/pepsia -- indigestion, dyspepsia
dys/phemia -- expression ou dénomination désagréable
dys/entericus -- pertaining to dysentery, dysenteric, Subst. m. one who has the dysentery
dys/prophoron -- a mispronunciation
dys/enteria -- a flux, dysentery
dys/pnoicus -- one who labors under difficulty of breathing.&mdash; Plur.
dys/uriacus -- one who suffers from suppression of urine
dys/phoricus -- unfortunate
dys/enteriacus -- qui a la dysenterie
__falsi*
falsilocus -- that speaks falsehoods, Subst.
falsiiurius -- that swears falsely
falsiloquax -- menteur.
falsiloquus -- that speaks falsehoods, Subst. m. a false accuser
falsiparens -- having a pretended father
falsitestis -- faux témoin
falsitas -- falsehood, falsity, Plur.
falsificatus* -- falsified
falsiloquium* -- false speaking, falsehood, lying
falsidicus -- speaking falsely, lying
falsimonia -- a trick, imposition
falsificus -- that acts falsely#
falsidicentia -- habitual falsehood
__felli
felliducus -- that carries off the gall
fellico -- to suck, draw by sucking2
fellito -- to suck, draw by sucking2
fellicula -- Isid. bile.>
fellineus -- de bile.>
fellitus -- imbued with gall, steeped in gall>
fellifluus -- flowing with gall
fellinosus -- bilieux.>
__fisco
haushalten, verwalten
fiscopatronus -- der Vorsteher des Fiskus
__flucti
flucti/fragus -- wave-breaking
fluctiger -- wave-bringing, wave impelling
flucticolor -- seacolored
flucticulus -- a little wave, wavelet
fluctigenus* -- born in the waves
fluctisonus* -- wave-resounding, roaring with waves
fluctiuagus* -- driven about by the waves
flucticola* -- living in waves
fluctigena* -- wave-born, born in the waves
__grammato*
grammatodidascalus -- a teacher of language
grammatophylacium -- a place for keeping state papers, archives
__haemo*
haemophthisicus -- a person with corrupted blood
haemorrhoia -- flux de sang
haemorrhois -- a kind of poisonous serpent
haemostasis -- a plant that stops the flow of blood
haemoptysis -- crachement de sang, hémoptysie.
haemoptois -- crachement de sang.
haemosis -- maladie des yeux.#
haemoptyicus -- one who spits blood, med.
haemorrhagia -- a violent bleeding, hemorrhage, bleeding at the nose
haemorrhoida -- the piles, hemorrhoids
haemorrhousa -- she that has a hemorrhage
haemoptoicus -- one who spits blood, med.
haemorrhoicus -- that has the hemorrhoids, piles
haemorrhoissa -- femme qui a des hémorroïdes.
__helio*
heliocaminus -- an apartment exposed to the sun, used as a winter abode
heliocallis -- the sunflower
heliochryson -- c. heliochrysos.
helioscopion -- a species of
helioscopios -- a kind of, spurge
helioselinon -- ache de marais.
heliotropion -- - 1 - tournesol [plante]. - 2 - sorte de pierre précieuse.
heliotropios -- héliotrope (pierre précieuse).
__hemi*
hemicranici -- sufferers from headache
hemiolios -- one and a half
hemionion -- a plant, called also#
hemitheus -- a demigod
heminaria -- presents of the measure of a
hemiolius -- c. sesquialter
hemina -- a measure, the half of a, measure
hemicranium -- migraine, mal de tête
hemicyclium -- a semicircle, semicircular recess, with seats
hemicyclius -- en forme d'hémicycle, en demi-cercle.
hemigranici -- v. hemicrania.
hemicadium -- the half of a
hemicillus -- a mule
hemicrania -- a pain on one side of the head, headache, in lemm.;
hemicyclus -- a, half-circle, semicircle
hemidexius -- qui renferme la moitié [d'un hexamètre].
heminarium -- présent de la contenance d'une hémine, petit cadeau.#
hemitonion -- demi-ton
hemitonium -- a half-tone, semitone
hemitritis -- c. hemitritaeus
hemithea -- demi-déesse.
hemitritaeus -- A semi-tertian ague
hemistichium -- a half-verse, hemistich
hemistrigium -- a measure, half a striga
hemitriglyphus* -- demi-triglyphe.
hemicylindrus -- a half-cylinder
hemisphaerion -- - 1 - moitié de sphère. - 2 - coupole, dôme.
hemisphaerium -- a half-globe, hemisphere.
hemitritaicus -- of or belonging to the semi-tertian ague
__herbi*
herbigradus -- going in the grass
herbido -- to give a grassy appearance to>
herbipotens -- skilled in herbs
herbidus -- full of grass, grassy>
herbifer -- producing grass, grassy
herbilia -- gessette (plante).#
herbilis -- fed with grass>
herbitum -- pelouse, pré.>
__hexa*
hexagonium -- hexagone
hexagonum* -- a six-sided figure, hexagon
hexameter -- of six feet, hexameter
hexaphori* -- six porteurs (pour porter le même fardeau).
hexaptota* -- nouns that have six cases
hexasemus* -- qui a six temps [en métrique].
hexagonus* -- hexagone
hexachordos -- having six musical strings, stops
hexastichus* -- of six lines, rows, long-eared barley
hexaclinon -- a couch to hold six persons
hexahedrum -- hexaèdre.
hexaphoron -- Mart. litière portée par six esclaves.
hexaphoros -- one of six who carry a load together, med.
hexaphorum -- a litter borne by six men
hexaptotos -- qui a les six cas
hexastylos -- having six columns
hexasyllabus* -- qui a six syllabes.
__hiero
hieroglyphicus -- hieroglyphic
hieronica -- a conqueror in the sacred games#
hieromnemon -- a precious stone
hierophanta -- a teacher of religious rites and ceremonies, a high-priest, hierophant, in the country
hierophylax -- the keeper of a temple
hierobulbus -- muscari [plante]
hierodulus* -- a temple servant
hieronices -- hiéronique, vainqueur dans les jeux.#
hieronicae -- Sieger in den heiligen Kampfspielen#
hierophantes -- a teacher of religious rites and ceremonies, a high-priest, hierophant, in the country
hierographicus -- hierographic
hierophantria -- a priestess
__hippo*
hippocamelus -- a fabulous animal, half horse and half camel
hippopera -- valise, portemanteau#
hippocampos -- a sea-horse
hippodromos -- hippodrome racecourse
hippophobas -- a plant
hippophonia -- les Hippophonies (fête annuelle des Amazones).
hippotoxota -- der Bogenschütze zu Pferde - der berittene Bogenschütze
hippocomos -- écuyer, palefrenier.
hippoperae -- saddle-bags
hippopheon -- a plant
hippophlomos -- espèce de mandragore [plante].
hippopotamus -- a river - horse, hippopotamus
hipposelinon -- maceron commun (plante).
hippotoxotae -- mounted archers
hippophlomon -- white mandrake
hippocentaurus* -- a fabulous creature, half horse and half man, hippocentaur
hippomarathrum -- fenouil sauvage.
hippolapathon -- horse-sorrel
hippophaeston -- a prickly plant
hippomarathon -- horse-fennel, wild fennel
hippopotamios -- 
__holo*
holocaustum -- whole burnt offering, sacrifice wholly consumed by fire; holocaust; (Hebrew);
holocyron -- a plant, ground-pine
holosteon -- a whitish plantain#
holouerus -- quite real; entirely of purple
holocautoma -- a whole burnt-offering, holocaust
holochrysus -- a plant
holographus* -- entirely autograph, med.
holosericus -- all of silk
holosiderus -- all iron
holouitreus -- tout de verre
holocarpoma -- ein aus Früchten bestehendes Brandopfer
holocaustos -- zum Brandopfer bestimmt
holocaustus -- offert en sacrifice
holochrysos -- ganz golden
holothuria -- a sort of water-polype
holocleros -- in allen seinen Teilen unversehrt
holocrysus -- - 1 - immortelle (fleur). - 2 - un basilic.
holocarposis -- die Darbringung eines aus Früchten bestehenden  Brandopfers - bestehende n  Brandopfers
holocaustoma -- ein Brandopfer
holoschoenos -- a sort of rush
holoporphyrus -- entirely purple
holosericatus -- Aug. vêtu de soie.
holosphyratos -- massif, solide
holocaustosis -- die Darbringung eines Brandopfers
hololosericus -- qui est tout de soie.
holosericoprata -- der Händler mit echt seidenen Waren
__homi
homileticus -- homilétique
homilia -- (Lebaigue P. 573) Isid. homélie, discours.
homicidalis -- homicidal, murderous
homicidium -- manslaughter, homicide, murder
homicida* -- a manslayer, homicide, murderer, slayer of men
homicidarius -- of or relating to man-slaying, homicidal
homicidialis -- homicide.
homicidiator -- der Mörder
homicidiarius -- de meurtre, de carnage.
__horo*
horoscopium -- an instrument used in the casting of nativities
horoscopo -- to take the time of one's nativity, to draw a horoscope
horologicus -- of or belonging to a clock
horoscopica -- the casting of nativities
horologium -- a clock, horologe, sun-dial, water-clock
horoscopos -- - 1 - horoscope, nativité, thème astral. - 2 - constellation sous laquelle on est né.
horoscopus -- that shows the hour.
horologiaris -- of or belonging to a horologe, clock
horoscopicus -- indicating the hour
horologiarius -- mit einer Uhr versehen
__hydra*
hydragonus -- a water - plant
hydraules -- one who plays on the waterorgan>
hydraulus -- a water-organ>
hydraulia -- c. hydraulus, -- orgue hydraulique>
hydrargyrus -- quicksilver artificially prepared>
hydraulicus -- of or belonging to the water-organ, hydraulic>
hydragogia* -- an aqueduct, canal
hydraletes -- a water-mill
hydrastina -- Apul. chanvre de bois (plante).#
hydragogos -- Apul. lauréole (arbrisseau). -- C. -Aur. qui attire les sérosités.
hydraula -- joueur d'orgue hydraulique.>
__hyper*
hyperbola -- hyperbole [rhét.]
hyperbole -- exaggeration, hyperbole
hypericon -- a plant, called also, and, ground-pine
hyperocha -- excess, superabundance>
hypericum -- a plant, called also, and, ground-pine#
hyperdorius -- hyperdorien [mode musical]
hyperochius -- qui dépasse les autres, supérieur
hyperthyrum -- the lintel of a door-way#
hyperbaton -- transposition of words#
hyperaeolius -- hyperéolien [nom d'un mode musical]
hyperbolicus -- excessive, overstrained, hyperbolical, med., pledged, Adv.
hyperiastius -- hyperionien [nom d'un mode musical]
hyperbolaeus -- extreme
hyperausteros -- C. Aur. très âpre.
hyperphrygius -- hyperphrygien [nom d'un mode musical]
hypersarcosis -- excroissance de chair
hypercatalectus -- a verse that has at the end a syllable or a foot too much, hypercatalectic
hypermixolydius -- hypermixolydien [nom d'un mode en musique]
hypercatalecticus -- a verse that has at the end a syllable or a foot too much, hypercatalectic
__hypo*
hypoglossa -- a kind of butcher's broom, ruscus
hypobasis -- the pedestal, base
hypochyma -- a cataract in the eye, med.
hypocrita -- A mime who accompanied the delivery of an actor by gestures#
hypogaeos -- souterrain.
hypogaeum -- a vault, cellar under ground, a burying-vault, sepulchre
hypogeson -- a kind of houseleek that grows in the gutters of roofs
hypolysos -- a plant, also called#
hypomelis -- a kind of sourish fruit
hypomnema -- a written remark, memorandum, note
hypophora -- an objection
hypotheca* -- a pledge, security#
hypozygos -- plèvre
hypoaeolius -- hypoéolien [nom d'un mode musical]
hypocauston -- a bathing-room heated from below, a sweating-chamber
hypocaustum* -- a bathing-room heated from below, a sweating-chamber
hypocaustus -- chauffé en dessous.
hypochoeris -- a plant#
hypocorisma -- a diminutive
hypographum* -- a rough draught, sketch
hypoiastius -- hypoionien [nom d'un mode musical]
hypomnemata -- notes.
hypotaurium -- the part of the body between the scrotum and fundament
hypothetici -- Apul. qui procèdent par hypothèses (mathématiciens).
hypocisthis -- a parasitic plant that grows on the cisthus
hypocausis -- a furnace that heats from below
hypochysis -- a cataract in the eye
hypocistis -- hypocistis, [plante parasite]
hypocrisis -- an imitation of a person's speech and gestures, mimicry
hypocrites -- - 1 - mime, comédien. - 2 - Vulg. hypocrite.
hypodorius -- hypodorien [t. de musique]
hypopodion -- marchepied
hypostasis -- a substance, personality, hypostasy
hypotenusa -- the hypothenuse
hypotrimma -- a sauce made of all sorts of condiments
hypozeugma -- rattachement de plusieurs sujets à un seul attribut
hypozeuxis -- subjonction [attribut distinct à chaque sujet ; contraire de hypozeugma
hypocautos -- chauffé en dessous.
hypodromus -- promenade couverte
hypolydios -- unterlydisch
hypopodium -- a footstool
hypodyma -- enveloppe des viscères de la poitrine
hypogeum -- a vault, cellar under ground, a burying-vault, sepulchre
hypopium -- meurtrissure à l'oeil
hypogeus -- underground, subst.
hypomone -- a holding back of the principal thought for a surprise
hypobrychium -- a drowning whirlpool
hypochondria -- the soft part of the body from the ribs to the groin, the abdomen
hypocoriasis -- a disease under the pupil of the eye in cattle
hypodiaconus -- a sub-deacon
hypoglottion -- a plant, called also, and, broad-leaved ruscus
hypolipticus -- qui reste en arrière
hypomochlion -- the support of a lever, a fulcrum
hypophrygius -- hypophrygien [nom d'un mode musical]
hypotheticus -- a mathematician who proceeds hypothetically
hypocausterium -- c. hypocauston
hypodidascalus* -- an under-teacher
hypotrachelium -- the neck of a column below the capital
hypotenusalis -- of or belonging to the hypothenuse
hypothecarius -- of or relating to a mortgage
hypomnematographus* -- a registrar
__labe
labe/facio -- to cause to totter, shake, loosen, make ready to fall, opened, deeply ploughed, relaxed, to cause to waver, shake, to shake in allegiance, disquieted, To shake, weaken, overthrow, ruin, destroy (labor)
labe/facto -- to cause to totter, shake, overthrow, to shake, throw down, overthrow, destroy, ruin, weaken, To weaken in purpose, move
labe/factio -- Oros. ébranlement.
labe/factus -- outh
labens -- part. prés. de lābor.
labellum* -- a little lip, pout -- a small basin
labecula -- a slight stain, reproach
labeosus -- having large lips, blubber-lipped
labesco -- - intr. - Rufin. glisser, s'écouler.
labefactatio -- a shaking, loosening, weakening
labefactatus -- p. p. de labefacto
__lacu
lacu/latus -- four-cornered, checkered, woven in square compartments, checks, with inwoven or embroidered pictures
lacunosus -- full of hollows, no gap
lacunaria -- panels of the under surface of a cornice
lacunarium -- gen. plur., dat. plur., a wainscoted and gilded ceiling, a panel-ceiling, a ceiling
lacu/narius -- a gravedigger
lacu/natura -- a ditch, pit, hole;, a pool, pond
lacusculus -- A little lake
lacuturris -- a kind of cabbage
lacuna -- a ditch, pit, hole, pool, pond, a gap, void, defect, want
lacuno -- to panel, chequer
lacunar -- a wainscoted and gilded ceiling, panel-ceiling, ceiled roof, be unobservant
laculla -- fossette (au menton).
__lani
lanipendia -- Inscr. Dig. celle qui pèse la laine (et qui distribue la tâche - pensum - aux ouvrières dans les ateliers impériaux). (lana)
lanistatura -- the profession of a
laniarium -- a butcher's stall2>
lanicutis -- woollyskinned
lanificus -- wool-working, that works in wool, spinning, weaving, the spinning sisters, the Fates
lanilutor -- wool-washer
lanionius -- of or belonging to a butcher2>
lanilotor -- der Wollwäscher
laniarius -- pertaining to a butcher, subst. -- a butcher
lanificium -- the working of wool, spinning, weaving
lanipendus -- that weighs out wool, portions it out for spinning, subst.
lanius -- a butcher2>
laniatus -- a tearing in pieces, lacerating, anguish, remorse -- part. passé de lanio. - a - déchiré. - b - brisé.2>
laniatio -- a tearing in pieces, a mangling, lacerating2>
laniator -- a butcher2>
lanicium -- SE
lanifica -- a wool-spinner
lanigera -- a lamb, sheep
laniolum -- a little butcher's stall2>
lanities -- wool
lanitium -- wool
lanicies -- wool
lanicius -- of wool, woolly, fleecy, subst.
lanienus -- of a butcher, butcher's2>
lanipens -- c. lanipendens.
lanitius -- qui a une toison.
lanicia -- v. lanitia.
laniena -- a butcher's stall2>
lanifer -- wool-bearing, cotton-bearing
lanipes -- with wool on the feet, woolfooted
lanista -- a trainer of gladiators, fencingmaster#
lanitia -- laine, lainage.
lanifex -- der Wollarbeiter
laniger -- woolbearing, fleecy, m., a ram, a lamb -- a ram, the Ram
laniamentum -- a tearing to pieces2>
laniatorium -- a butcher's stall2>
lanisticius -- of or belonging to a trainer of gladiators#
lanitondium -- tonte.#
lanipendius -- that weighs out wool, portions it out for spinning -- one who weighs out wool
lanifricarius -- der Tuchfrottierer
__lapi*
lapidosus -- full of stones, stony, Hard as stone, stony
lapidaris -- of stone, stone-
lapidatio -- a throwing of stones, stoning, fall of stones
lapidator -- a thrower of stones
lapidatus -- part. passé de lapido. - 1 - attaqué à coups de pierres. - 2 - lapidé. - 3 - au fig. attaqué.
lapidesco -- to become stone, turn to stone, to petrify
lapidatum -- pluie de pierres.
lapidarius -- of/concerning stone-cutting/quarrying; [litterae ~ => block capital letters];
lapidatrix -- Orig. celle qui lapide.
lapidicida* -- a quarryman, stone-cutter
lapillesco -- to become stone, turn to stone;, to become hard, be distended
lapillisco -- to become stone, turn to stone;, to become hard, be distended
lapillosus -- couvert de cailloux
lapillulus -- a very little stone, gravel-stone
lapisculus -- petite pierre.
lapido -- to stone, throw stones, pers. impers., it rains stones, P. neut
lapideus -- of stone, consisting of stones, stone-, a shower of stones
lapicida* -- a quarryman, stone-cutter
lapillus -- a little stone, pebble, A voting pebble, ballot, A precious stone, gem, jewel, pearls and emeralds, bits of Numidian marble
lapidicaesor -- a stone-cutter
lapicidinae -- stone-quarries;
lapidositas -- a stony hardness
lapicidinarius -- a superintendent of stone-quarries
__late
latebricola -- one who dwells in lurking-places, brothels
lateralia -- saddle-bags
lateralis -- of or belonging to the side, lateral
lateramen -- any thing made like bricks
lateriana -- une sorte de poire (peut-être, poire du Latérium).
lateraria -- a brickkiln -- side-beams
latebrosus -- full of lurking-holes, hidden, retired, secret, porous
latericius -- made of bricks, n., brickwork
laterculum* -- a register of all the offices and dignities in the Roman empire
later/culus -- privately
latericium -- brickwork
lateritana -- a good sort of pears
lateritius -- made, consisting of bricks, subst.
laterarius -- -I. of or pertaining to bricks, brick- -II. of or belonging to the sides;, subst. -- zu den Seiten gehörig, Seiten-
laterensis -- of or belonging to the side. Subst. m. an attendant, body-guard, satellite -- a Roman surname in the gens Juventia
latens -- lying hid, hidden, concealed, secret, unknown
latero -- - tr. - Prisc. mettre de côté.
laterina -- a brickkiln
laternio -- Hor. voleur.
latebra -- a hiding-place, lurkinghole, covert, retreat, hidden seat of life, cut out the arrowhead, a lurking-place, hidden recess, retreat, A subterfuge, shift, cloak, pretence, feigned excuse
laterna* -- a lantern, lamp, torch
latesco -- to hide oneself, be hidden -- to grow broad, to widen
latericulus -- privately
laterisiana -- une sorte de poire (peut-être, poire du Latérium).
lateritiana -- a good sort of pears
laternarius -- celui qui éclaire, celui qui porte la lanterne (un esclave).
later/culensis -- one who keeps the register of offices, a secretary
__later
a brick, tile, wash a brick, labor in vain
laterculenses -- C.-Just. gardiens du registre des charges.
lateralia -- saddle-bags
lateralis -- of or belonging to the side, lateral
lateramen -- any thing made like bricks
lateriana -- une sorte de poire (peut-être, poire du Latérium).
lateraria -- a brickkiln -- side-beams
latericius -- made of bricks, n., brickwork
laterculum* -- a register of all the offices and dignities in the Roman empire
laterculus -- privately
latericium -- brickwork
lateritana -- a good sort of pears
lateritius -- made, consisting of bricks, subst.
laterarius -- -I. of or pertaining to bricks, brick- -II. of or belonging to the sides;, subst. -- zu den Seiten gehörig, Seiten-
laterensis -- of or belonging to the side. Subst. m. an attendant, body-guard, satellite -- a Roman surname in the gens Juventia
laterina -- a brickkiln
laternio -- Hor. voleur.
laterna* -- a lantern, lamp, torch
latericulus -- privately
laterisiana -- une sorte de poire (peut-être, poire du Latérium).
lateritiana -- a good sort of pears
laternarius -- celui qui éclaire, celui qui porte la lanterne (un esclave).
laterculensis -- one who keeps the register of offices, a secretary
__laua
lauabrum -- a bathing-tub
lauatrina -- - 1 - Varr. salle de bain. - 2 - Varr. latrines.
lauamentum -- Ps. Aug. au fig. lavage.
lauandaria -- things to be washed
lauatorium -- Gloss. lavoir.
lauatorius -- Schol. Virg. qui sert à laver.
lauacrum -- bath;
lauatrix -- Gloss. laveuse.
lauatio -- a bathing, bath, bathing apparatus
lauator -- a clothes-washer
lauatus -- part. passé de lavo.
__leuco*
leuco/comus -- having white leaves, blossoms
leuco/notus -- the, white, clear, dry, south wind, the south-southwest wind?
leuco/phaeatus -- clothed in dark gray, ash-colored garments?
leucocoum -- white Coan wine?
leucogaea -- a precious stone almost unknown
leucocomos -- having white leaves, blossoms
leucogaeus -- of white earth
leucozomus -- with white sauce
leucoion -- the white violet>
leucopis -- a plant>
leucoma -- tache blanche, taie [sur l'oeil]
leucochrysos -- A precious stone, a species of chrysolite
leucographis -- a kind of St. Mary's thistle, which was used as a remedy for spitting blood
leucographia -- a precious stone
leucostictos -- espèce de porphyre?
leucophaeus -- ash - colored, dun - colored, med.?
leucophoron -- gold-size?
leucophlegmatia -- pâleur annonçant l'hydropisie?
leucopoecilos -- a precious stone?
leucophthalmos -- a precious stone?
__limi
limi/genus -- produced in mud, slime, mud-born
limi/trophus -- lands set apart to furnish subsistence to the troops stationed on the frontiers
liminaris -- belonging to a threshold, lintel
limitalis -- Inscr. qui est sur la limite, qui est sur la frontière, limitrophe.
limitanus -- Prisc. placé aux frontières, limitrophe.
limitaris -- that is on the border
limitatio -- a fixing, determination
limitator -- Serv. arpenteur.
limitaneus -- that is on the borders, situated on the borders, frontier troops
limito -- to enclose within boundaries, limits, to bound
limicola* -- a dweller in the mud
liminium -- v. l'explication de Servius d.
limitus -- Ven.-Fort. c. limatus.
limitamentum -- Mar.-Vict. action de déterminer, détermination.
__limito
to enclose within boundaries, limits, to bound
limito/trophus -- lands set apart to furnish subsistence to the troops stationed on the frontiers
__lino
to daub, besmear, anoint, spread, rub over, sealed with pitch, that deserve erasure, adorned at regular intervals, To bedaub, bemire, degrade
linostemus -- : tissé de lin et de laine (la chaîne étant de lin et la trame de laine).
linozostis -- a plant, called also
linostimus -- tissé de lin et de laine
linostrophon -- a plant, called also
__litho*
lithostrotum -- mosaicwork
lithotomia -- lithotomy, the cutting out of a stone from the bladder
lithospermon -- a plant, stone-crop, gromwell
lithostrotos -- de mosaïque
lithognomon -- qui connaît les pierres
__luci
luci/fugus -- light-shunning, shy
lucibilis -- bright, clear
lucidatio -- Cassiod. éclaircissement, lucidité.
luciditas -- clarté, splendeur, éclat.
luci/ferax -- Fort. très lumineux.
luci/ficus -- light-making, light-giving
luci/fluus -- lightstreaming, light-beaming, brilliant
luci/fugax -- lightshunning
luci/petus -- seeking light
lucisator -- lightproducer, author of light
luci/parens -- light-bearing, light-producing
lucido -- - tr. - Cassiod. éclaircir, élucider.
lucino -- früh aufsein
lucius -- a fish, the pike
luci/fuga* -- lightfleeing, light-shunning
lucinium -- a glowworm
luci/peta* -- qui recherche la lumière.
luci/fico -- to make bright, to brighten
lucidus* -- full of light, clear, bright, shining, brilliant, lighted, Neut, White, clear, perspicuous, lucid
lucisco -- to begin to shine, dawn, it grows light here, at dawn, at break of day
lucinus* -- lightbringing, bringing to the light, subst.
luci/fer -- lightbringing, the horses of Luna, m., the morning-star, the planet Venus, The son of Aurora and Cephalus, Day
__lucri
lucri/fuga -- gain-fleeing, gain-shunning
lucri/peta -- a gainseeker, one fond of lucre
lucri/fico -- to gain, win
lucri/facio* -- pass.
lucri/ficus -- gainful, profitable
lucri/petes -- 
lucri/fer -- Gewinn bringend
lucri/pes -- âpre au gain, cupide
lucrius -- of or pertaining to gain
lucri/cupido -- the passion for gain
lucri/factus -- 
lucri/ficabilis -- gainful, profitable
__macro*
macrochera -- having long sleeves, long-sleeved
macrocolum -- large-sized paper, royal paper
macrologia* -- tediousness in speech
macrocollum -- large-sized paper, royal paper
macrocherus -- qui est à longues manches
__magn
magn/animus -- greatsouled, high-minded, magnanimous, high-spirited
magnalia* -- great things, mighty works, words
magnates -- les grands (Vulg.).
magnatus -- un personnage éminent
magnitas -- greatness, magnitude
magnus -- ඔH
magnas -- a great man, important person, magnate
magnes -- of Magnesia (in Thessaly): lapis, a magnet, loadstone
magni/ficentia -- loftiness, grandeur, nobleness, high-mindedness, grandeur, magnificence, splendor, sumptuousness, Display, pomposity, boastfulness, bombast
magni/ficentus -- 
magnificus -- great, elevated, noble, distinguished, eminent, august, fond of display, fond of show, Splendid, rich, fine, costly, sumptuous, magnificent, of high strain, lofty, sublime, Boastful, pompous
magn/animis -- high-minded, magnanimous
magneticus -- magnetic
magnidicus -- that talks big, boastful, bragging
magnifacio* -- to make, think much of
magnisonus* -- loud-sounding
magni/ficium -- grande action
magni/loquax -- talking largely
magni/loquus -- vaunting, boastful
magni/sonans -- loud-sounding
magni/fico -- to make much of, set a high value on
magnitudo -- greatness, size, bulk, magnitude, A great number, large quantity, abundance, greatness, vastness, extent, greatness of soul
magnaeuus -- of a great age
magn/arius -- of or belonging to what is great, in the gross
magnicies -- greatness, size
magnities -- greatness, size
magn/animitas -- greatness of soul, magnanimity
magni/ficatio -- a making much of, making great, magnifying
magniloquium* -- pomposity, boasting
magni/loquentia -- elevated language, lofty style, Pompous language, magniloquence, boasting
__magni
magnipendo -- - tr. - estimer beaucoup, faire grand cas de.
magnitas -- greatness, magnitude
magnificentia -- loftiness, grandeur, nobleness, high-mindedness, grandeur, magnificence, splendor, sumptuousness, Display, pomposity, boastfulness, bombast
magnificentus -- 
magnificus -- great, elevated, noble, distinguished, eminent, august, fond of display, fond of show, Splendid, rich, fine, costly, sumptuous, magnificent, of high strain, lofty, sublime, Boastful, pompous
magnidicus -- that talks big, boastful, bragging
magnifacio* -- to make, think much of
magnisonus* -- loud-sounding
magnificium -- grande action
magniloquax -- talking largely
magniloquus -- vaunting, boastful
magnisonans -- loud-sounding
magnifico -- to make much of, set a high value on
magnitudo -- greatness, size, bulk, magnitude, A great number, large quantity, abundance, greatness, vastness, extent, greatness of soul
magnicies -- greatness, size
magnities -- greatness, size
magnificatio -- a making much of, making great, magnifying
magniloquium* -- pomposity, boasting
magniloquentia -- elevated language, lofty style, Pompous language, magniloquence, boasting
__mala
the cheek-bone, jaw, A cheek
malacisso -- to, render soft, supple, to soften, make pliable
malarium -- pommeraie, verger.
malaxo -- to soften, mollify
malacus -- soft, pliable; effeminate, delicate;
malache -- a kind of mallows
malacia -- a calm at sea, dead calm
malagma -- an emollient, poultice, cataplasm -- an emollient, poultice, cataplasm
malacticus -- mouifying
malandriae -- Blasen (Blattern) am Halse - Aussatz, Räude
malaginum -- a plaster made without fire
malaxatio -- softening, mollifying
malaculus -- gar weich, gar zart
malandria -- blisters, pustules on the neck -- blisters, pustules on the neck
malandriosus -- full of blisters, pustules on the neck
__mali
mali/loquium -- an evil-speaking, slander
malignus -- ill-disposed, wicked, malicious, spiteful, envious, malignant, malign, unkind, Stingy, niggardly, reserved, slanderous, barren, narrow, scanty
malignor -- to do, contrive maliciously, to malign
malities -- c. malitia
malitia -- ill-will, spite, malice, from your roguery
mali/fer -- apple-bearing
maligno -- - tr. - préparer (qqch, aliquid) avec une mauvaise intention, préparer (qqn, qqch) pour nuire.
malinus* -- of or belonging to an apple-tree
malitas -- evil, harm
mali/cordis -- badhearted
malicorium -- the rind of a pomegranate
malignitas -- ill-will, spite, malice, envy, malignity, Stinginess, niggardliness, the niggardly distribution
mali/gnosus -- active in mischief
mali/loquax -- evil-speaking, slanderous
mali/loquus -- evilspeaking, slanderous
malitiosus -- full of wickedness, knavish, crafty, malicious, a forest in the Sabine territory
mali/uolens -- ill-disposed, disaffected, envious, spiteful, malevolent, posit., Sup., subst.
malignantes -- the wicked
mali/ficus -- re
maliuolus -- ill-disposed, disaffected, envious, spiteful, malevolent
malitiositas -- wickedness, knavishness
mali/uolentia -- ill-will, evil disposition, dislike, hatred, envy, malevolence
__malo
to choose rather, prefer, rather than these, much rather.&mdash;To incline, prefer, be more favorable, would rather he had them
malo/bathratus -- anointed with
malo/mellum -- sorte de pomme très douce
malope -- mallows
malo/bathrinus -- made of betel
malo/bathron -- a costly ointment, betel, malobathrum (from an Indian plant)
malo/bathrum -- an Indian, Syrian plant, from which a costly oint ment was prepared, betel, base cin namon
malo/granata -- a pomegranatetree
malo/granatum -- a pomegranate
__manu*
manu/ballista -- a hand-ballista
manubr/iatus -- furnished with a handle3>
manub/iae -- booty, money obtained by the sale of booty, prize-money, Official perquisites, booty2>
manualis -- for the hand, that can be thrown by hand>
manuatus -- furnished with hands>
manucium -- a glove, muff>
manuleus -- the long sleeve of a tunic
manub/ius -- 2>
manutius -- celui qui a de longues mains
manuor -- to steal
manuale -- - 1 - Mart. étui de livre. - 2 - Gloss. livre portatif, manuel.
manucla -- manche de la catapulte#
manubia -- Sen. éclair, coup de tonnerre (terme de la langue des Etrusques).#
manulea -- A long sleeve>
manu/festarius -- - 1 - manifeste, évident, incontestable, avéré (en parl. de ch.). - 2 - pris sur le fait, pris en flagrant délit (en parl. de pers.).
manu/pretiosus -- precious, valuable, costly
manub/ialis -- of or belonging to booty, derived from the sale of booty2
manuciolum -- a small bundle
manu/festus -- OFTENED
manu/inspex -- a hand-inspector, student, practitioner of palmistry
manu/leatus -- furnished with long sleeves
manu/missio -- a setting free, manumission
manu/missor -- one who gives a slave his freedom, a liberator, emancipator
manu/missus -- P. of manumitto
manu/tigium -- a touching, feeling with the hand
manuciolus -- das Bündchen, Bündelchen
manu/plaris -- miles, absol., of or belonging to a maniple, company, manipular, one who rose from the ranks to be general
manubiarius -- of or belonging to booty;2>
manubr/iolum -- a little handle, haft3>
manu/learius -- a maker of sleeves, muffs
manu/pretium -- a workman's pay, artisan's hire, wages, pay, reward, Hire, rent
manu/pularis -- miles, absol., of or belonging to a maniple, company, manipular, one who rose from the ranks to be general (pullo?)
manu/tergium -- a towel
manu/mitto -- to release, set at liberty, manumit, enfranchise, emancipate, make free
manubr/ium -- that which is grasped, held in the hand;, a handle, hilt, haft, to take the handle out of one's hand, to deprive one of the opportunity of doing a thing3>
manuarius -- of or belonging to the hand, for the hand, that fills the hand -- a thief
manu/missalia -- formalités de l'affranchissement des esclaves
manu/factilis -- made by hand of man
manu/ballistarius -- one who carries, uses a hand-ballista
__medi
medipontus -- a kind of thick rope
medicina -- the healing art, medicine, surgery, practising, A remedy, medicine, a remedy, relief, antidote, means of rendering beautiful
medialis -- middle; subst.
medianum -- the middle part, the middle, Plur.
medianus -- that is in the middle, middle, Subst.
mediatio -- Dig. médiation, intervention.
mediator -- a mediator
medietas -- the middle, place in the middle, midst
medimnum -- a Greek dry measure, Greek bushel
medimnus -- a Greek bushel, masc., gen. plur.
mediolum -- le jaune [de l'oeuf]
meditata -- a carefully prepared speech
medica -- kind of clover; lucerne (Medicago sativa, resembles clover); (elecampane?); -- medicinal herbs
medium -- the middle, midst, centre, interval, intervening space, through the middle, the middle, interval, The midst, public, community, open to all, publicly, open to all, what is obvious, publish, before the public, leave undecided, adopt common words, common life, done away with, be put out of the way, is dead, go away, be present, come forward, for the general good, to supply the wants of all, ascribing to the whole body, for all to learn, a mean, middle course, strike out a middle theory, by a compromise, a moderate fortune, middling circumstances
medius -- in the middle, in the midst, mid, mean, middle, in the middle, between, on the altar between us, surrounds, from the midst, point with the middle finger, no middle course, half-way between, between, in the middle of the forum, midnight, at midsummer, the sun at noon, by the middle, of the middle, middling, medial, moderate, of middle age, extraordinary, common, Undetermined, undecided, neutral, ambiguous, Indifferent, not imperative, Intermediate, like each some respects, avoiding both extremes, Central, intimate, profound, essential, essential claims to honor, buried in, equally ready for, m., a mediator
medico -- to imbue with healing power, medicate, drug, steep, sprinkled with juices, drugged, To color, dye, stain, tinge
medion -- a medicinal plant
meditor -- to reflect, muse, consider, meditate, give attention, how to defend yourself, I have thought over, have prepared you, To meditate, plan, devise, contrive, To meditate, study, exercise, practise, rehearse, prepared, studied, rehearsed mumblings, To sing, celebrate in song
medicus -- a medical man, physician, surgeon -- of or pertaining to healing, healing, curative, medical
mediale -- the middle
medians -- part. de medio
medicor -- to heal, cure, to curve, relieve
medi/terraneus -- inland, remote from the sea, mediterranean, continental, n, the interior
medio/criculus -- rather middling
medi/terraneum -- the interior
medicatiua -- remèdes
medi/lunius -- in the middle of the month, having half a disk, half-orbed
medi/tullus -- intérieur, intime
mediocritas -- a middle state, medium, mean, moderateness, moderation, moderate passions.&mdash;Moderate &lt;*&gt;dowment, mediocrity
medi/tullium -- the middle
mediastinus -- a common servant, drudge, slave of all work, menial
medicabilis -- to be healed, curable
medicinalis -- of or pertaining to medicine, medical, medicinal
meditatiuus -- meditative, which signify a desire to perform an action
medi/terreus -- inland, remote from the sea
meditamenta -- - 1 - premières notions, les éléments. - 2 - travail préparatoire, exercice, préparation, prélude.
medicamen -- a drug, medicament, remedy, antidote, medicine, plasters, A drug, poison, A paint, wash, cosmetic, a remedy, antidote
mediocris -- of middling size, medium, middling, moderate, ordinary, moderate, mean, mediocre, inferior, inconsiderable, narrow, not insignificant, not common, superior, extraordinary, ardent
meditatio -- a thinking over, contemplation, dwelling upon, Study, preparation, rehearsal, practice
medicatus -- healing, medicinal, magic -- a charm
mediatrix -- a mediatrix
medibilis -- remédiable
medicatio -- a healing, cure;, a besprinkling with vegetable juices
medicator -- a physician
medicinus* -- of or belonging to a physician, surgeon, medical, subst.
medicosus* -- healing
medi/lunia -- premier quartier de la lune
meditamen -- a thinking of, a preparation
meditator -- one who thinks, plans, a meditator
meditatus -- P. of meditor -- a thinking, meditating upon, a meditation
medicamentum -- a drug, remedy, antidote, physic, medicine, medicament, A drug, potion, poison, a remedy, relief, antidote, An embellishment
meditabundus -- earnestly meditating, designing;
meditamentum -- a thinking of, preparation.&mdash;Plur.
meditatorium -- A preparation
mediterranea -- 
medicamentaria -- The art of preparing drugs, pharmacy
medicamentosus -- that has a healing power, medicinal
meditatiuncula -- a small, trifling preparation
medicamentarius -- of or belonging to drugs, to poisons; -- A druggist, apothecary, A preparer of poisons
__medic
medicabulum -- a healthy place
medicina -- the healing art, medicine, surgery, practising, A remedy, medicine, a remedy, relief, antidote, means of rendering beautiful
medicus -- a medical man, physician, surgeon -- of or pertaining to healing, healing, curative, medical
medicor -- to heal, cure, to curve, relieve
medicatiua -- remèdes
medicabilis -- to be healed, curable
medicinalis -- of or pertaining to medicine, medical, medicinal
medicamen -- a drug, medicament, remedy, antidote, medicine, plasters, A drug, poison, A paint, wash, cosmetic, a remedy, antidote
medicatus -- healing, medicinal, magic -- a charm
medicatio -- a healing, cure;, a besprinkling with vegetable juices
medicator -- a physician
medicinus* -- of or belonging to a physician, surgeon, medical, subst.
medicosus* -- healing
medicamentum -- a drug, remedy, antidote, physic, medicine, medicament, A drug, potion, poison, a remedy, relief, antidote, An embellishment
medicamentaria -- The art of preparing drugs, pharmacy
medicamentosus -- that has a healing power, medicinal
medicamentarius -- of or belonging to drugs, to poisons; -- A druggist, apothecary, A preparer of poisons
__medio
to halve, divide in the middle
medioximus -- In the middle, middlemost, between gods and men
medioxumus -- In the middle, middlemost, between gods and men
mediolum -- le jaune [de l'oeuf]
mediocriculus -- rather middling
mediocritas -- a middle state, medium, mean, moderateness, moderation, moderate passions.&mdash;Moderate &lt;*&gt;dowment, mediocrity
mediocris -- of middling size, medium, middling, moderate, ordinary, moderate, mean, mediocre, inferior, inconsiderable, narrow, not insignificant, not common, superior, extraordinary, ardent
__meli
meli/zomum -- honey-sauce
meli/mela -- honeyapples, must-apples
meliores -- ironice
melium -- a dog's collar
melica -- a lyric poem, ode -- a kind of vessel
melina -- mead -- a purse, wallet of marten-skin
melioro -- to make better, to better, improve
meliton -- a kind of wine
melinum -- Quince-oil
melicus -- musical, lyric -- 
melinus* -- of or belonging to honey; -- of or belonging to quinces, quince-; quinceyellow; -- of or belonging to the marten;
melicratum -- water-mead
melioratio -- a bettering, improvement, melioration
melioresco -- to begin to improve, grow better;
melittaena -- A plant, also called
melioratus -- part. p. de melioro
meli/chloros -- a precious stone yellow as honey
meli/chrysos -- gold-colored chrysolite
meliusculus -- somewhat better, rather better, rather more, neutr. sing..
meliceria -- matière jaunâtre du mélicéris.
meliceris -- a kind of tumor, meliceris
meli/chros -- a precious stone of the color of honey
melilotos -- a kind of clover, melilot, also called
meli/melum -- pomme-miel (une pomme très douce).
melitites -- a honey-drink made of honey and must
melitaena -- A plant, also called
melitinus -- of or belonging to honey, mixed with honey
melissophyllon -- balm-gentle, balm
__melis
a marten, badger
melisphyllum -- balm-gentle, balm
melissophyllon -- balm-gentle, balm
__melit
melit/turgus -- a bee-keeper?
meliton -- a kind of wine
melittaena -- A plant, also called
melitites -- a honey-drink made of honey and must
melitaena -- A plant, also called
melitinus -- of or belonging to honey, mixed with honey
__mendaci
mendaciloquium -- false-speaking, falsehood, mendacity
mendaciloquus -- false-speaking, lying, mendacious, subst. m. a lia
mendacitas -- false hood, mendacity
mendaciolum -- petit mensonge.
mendacium -- a lie, untruth, falsehood, fiction
mendaciunculum* -- a little untruth, fib, white lie
__meri
meribibulus -- wine-bibbing
meridies -- mid-day, noon, at high noon, The south
meridior -- to take a mid-day nap, siesta
merismos -- énumération des parties d'un tout
merito -- to earn, yield
meritum -- a merit, service, kindness, benefit, favor, as you deserved, Demerit, blame, fault, offence, by no fault of mine, no offence against him, Merit, worth, value, importance
meridio -- to take a mid-day nap, have a siesta.&mdash;Supin. acc
meritus -- deserving, guilty, unoffending, Due, deserved, fit, just, proper, right
meridionarius -- of or belonging to mid-day, meridional
meridianus -- of mid-day, of noon, Southerly, to the south
meri/dialis -- of midday
meridiatio -- a mid-day nap, siesta
meritorius -- earning money, earning money by prostitution.&mdash;Plur. n, hired lodgings
meri/bibula -- die Weinsäuferin
meri/dianum -- the south
meritorium -- 
meri/diana -- southern places, parts
meritoria -- places, rooms which are let out for a short time, to let out rooms for a short time
meri/diani -- sc. gladiatores, mid-day combatants, gladiators who fought at mid-day
meri/dionalis -- southern, meridional
__meso*
mesochorus -- one who stands in the middle of a chorus, to lead it, a chorusleader
mesonauta -- a seaman who ranked between the pilot and the rowers
mesopylus -- that is at the middle door
mesoides -- a musical modulation#
mesolabium -- a mathematical instrument for finding mean proportional lines, a mesolabe
mesoleucos -- A black precious stone with a white stripe
mesomacros -- a poetical foot of five syllables, of which only the middle one is long
mesozeugma -- mot qui relie plusieurs mots ou plusieurs propositions
mesozeygma -- das Mittelband
mesonyctium -- midnight, midnight apparition
mesonyctius -- of midnight, subst.
mesomelas -- a white precious stone with a black stripe
__meta*
a cone, pyramid
metaplasmus -- a grammatical change, irregularity, metaplasm
metall/um -- metal; mine; quarry;2>
metabole -- the transition to another key, set of tones
metanoea -- repentance?
metarius -- of or belonging to limits, boundaries#
metatura -- a measuring out, marking off#
metax/a -- raw silk3>
metalis -- conical#
metatio -- a measuring, meting out, a marking off#
metator -- one who marks off, fixer of boundaries#
metatus -- P. of metor#
metamorphosis -- a transformation, metamorphosis;
metacismus -- a frequent repetition of the letter, the pronunciation of, at the close of a word before a word beginning with a vowel, metacism#
metalepsis -- in rhetoric, the use of one word for another which it suggests by association
metall/aria -- a man, a woman that works in a mine, a miner2>
metalli/fer -- yielding, abounding in metal, metalliferous2>
metathesis -- a transposition of the letters of a word
metatorius -- of or pertaining to measuring out#
metax/arius -- ouvrier qui travaille la soie3>
metastasis -- A refusing
metall/icus -- of or belonging to metal, metallic -- A digger of metals, a mine-digger, miner2>
metall/arius -- ouvrier mineur, mineur.2>
metaphrasis -- paraphrase
metaphrenum -- the upper part of the spine
metamelos -- repentance?
metaphora -- a rhetorical figure, metaphor, a transferring of a word from its proper signification to another
metabasis -- métabase [rhét.]
metall/ica -- métallurgie2>
metatoria -- lettre qui sert à préparer le logement#
metax/arii -- silkdealers3>
metasyncriticus -- belonging to the discharge of peccant humors
__metro*
metropolita -- a bishop in a chief city, a metropolitan
metrocomia -- a village from which other villages have derived their inhabitants, a mother-village
metropolis -- a city from which other cities have been colonized, a mother-city;, chief city, metropolis
metropolitanum -- dignité de l'évêque métropolitain
metropolitanus -- of or belonging to a metropolis, metropolitan, subst. m. a metropolitan, the bishop of a metropolitan church
__mili
milipeda -- millepeda
miliacus -- fed with mil let, millet-birds, ortolans
miliarii -- 
milium -- millet
milito -- to be a soldier, perform military service, serve as a soldier, to make, wage, carry on, To serve, perform service, labor -- soldat, combattant
militia -- military service, warfare, war, exemption from military service, civil war, share in, military honors, in war, in war, in the army, domi, at home and abroad, at home and in the army, The soldiery, military, general, A service, laborious employment
milifolium -- a plant, milfoil, yarrow;
militarius -- soldierlike, military
miliarensis -- that contains a thousand, containing a thousand columns, containing a thousand paces
milimindrus -- c. hyoscyamus
miliarium -- a mile-stone, the golden mile-stone placed by Augustus in the forum -- a short and thick pillar which stood in the centre of the basin of an oil-mill to support the cupa; In baths, a tall and narrow vessel for drawing and warming water
militaris -- of a soldier, of war, of military service, military, warlike, martial, military ensigns, of service in the army, a military road -- a military man, soldier, warrior
miliaceus -- of millet, millet
miliacius -- de mil, de millet
miliginus -- of millet
milingior -- dép., être dans une position chétive, à l'étroit, dans la gêne
militiola -- a short, insignificant term of military service
militares -- guerriers
miliarius -- of or belonging to millet, millet- -- containing, comprising a thousand.
__mille
a thousand, ten hundred, on every thousand, a thousand paces, n., a mile, A thousand, innumerable, infinite
mille/peda -- thousandfeet, the wood-louse, milleped
millenus -- mille chacun, au nombre de mille
millefolia -- millefeuille (plante).
millesimus -- the thousandth
mille/modus -- c. multimodus
mille/folium -- a plant, milfoil, yarrow;
mille/formis -- of a thousand forms
millenarius -- containing a thousand, millenary
millensimus -- the thousandth
__mini
miniastrum -- cinabre qui n'est pas épuré.
ministro -- to attend, wait upon, serve, To take care of, manage, govern, direct, To provide, furnish, supply, give, afford, serve, attend, serve wine, execute
minister -- minister; -- subordinate, that serves, ministering, furthering, with the aid of a staff, m., an attendant, waiter, servant, aider, furtherer, promoter, helper, by whose agency, by my aid, under officers, prompters, administrator, with the help of Calchas, the eagle, one who serves
minianus -- painted with red-lead, cinnabar
miniaria -- mine de minium, de cinabre.
miniatus -- colored with red-lead, painted with cinnabar, colored red, a red-lead pencil, the statue of Jupiter
ministra -- a female attendant, maid-servant, assistant, the Vestal Sylvia, a servant, handmaid, accessory, abettor
minito -- to threaten, menace
minium -- red-lead
minius -- of cinnabar, minium, cinnabar-red, vermilion
minitor -- to threaten, menace
minimus -- least, smallest, very small, minute, trifling, insignificant, for the slightest mishap, trifles, the least among evils, n., trifles, least, shortest, very short, a moment, youngest, smallest, n., the least, lowest price, for a trifle
mininus -- costing a mina, of the worth of a mina
minimum -- la plus petite quantité de, très peu de, le moins de.
ministeriales -- imperial officers
ministerialis -- ministering
miniatulus -- somewhat red
ministerium -- an office, attendance, service, ministry, occupation, work, labor, employment, administration, A train, body of helpers
ministratio -- service, assistance
ministrator -- an attendant, helper, prompter
ministratus -- part. p. de ministro
miniaceus -- of cinnabar, minium, cinnabar-red, vermilion, med.
miniarius -- of or belonging to minium, cinnabar
ministrix -- a maid-servant, handmaid
minitatio -- a threatening
miniarium -- a cinnabar mine
minitabundus -- threatening;
ministeriani -- imperial officers, rubric
ministratrix -- a female attendant, handmaid
ministeriarius -- of or belonging to service, serviceable
ministratorius -- of or pertaining to an attendant, servant, in lemm
__molli
molli/comus -- soft-haired
mollitia -- pliability, flexibility, softness, softness, tenderness, weakness, irresolution, effeminacy, voluptuousness, wantonness, sensitive disposition, weakness, indulge oneself, unchastity
mollipes -- soft-footed
mollitus -- P. of mollio
mollicia -- 
molligo -- c. mollugo
molli/ficus -- making soft, softening
molli/fluus -- qui coule doucement / qui souffle doucement
molliculus -- voluptuous
mollicellus -- soft, delicate
mollimentum -- a means of softening, mitigating
mollitorius -- emollient
mollicina -- a kind of soft garment
molli/fico -- to make soft, to soften, mollify
mollities -- movableness, pliability, flexibility, suppleness; softness
mollitudo -- suppleness, flexibility, softness, softness, weakness
mollicies -- movableness, pliability, flexibility, suppleness; softness
__mon
mon/archia -- absolute rule, monarchy
monasticus -- monastique.
monstrum -- a divine omen, supernatural appearance, wonder, miracle, portent, illusions, nothing but wonders.&mdash;An abnormal shape, unnatural growth, monster, monstrosity, a repulsive character, monster, abomination, A horrible sight, pernicious thing, object of dread, awful deed
montanus -- of mountains, belonging to mountains, mountaineers, m, mountaineers, Full of mountains, mountainous
monarius -- having but one form
monaules -- a player on the single flute
monaulos -- a single flute, a flute with a single pipe
monedula -- a jackdaw, daw
monodium -- the song of a solo-singer
monoides -- having a single form
monti/fer -- mountain-bearing
montosus -- mountainous, full of mountains
montuosa -- mountain regions, mountainous parts
mon/archa -- an absolute ruler, a monarch
monachus -- de moine, de solitaire. -- a monk
monile -- a necklace, collar
monela -- a reminding, admonition
monito -- to remind, admonish
monita -- die Erinnerungen, Ermahnungen - die Andeutungen = Prophezeiungen
moneta -- - a - hôtel des monnaies. - b - argent monnayé, monnaie. - c - coin, moule, matrice (pour fabriquer la monnaie).
monitio -- a warning, admonition
monitum -- an admonition, advice, counsel, suggestion, oracle
monstro -- to point out, exhibit, make known, indicate, inform, advise, teach, instruct, tell, were betrayed, To ordain, institute, appoint, appointed, To advise, urge, stimulate, by natural instinct
monitus -- a reminding, warning, admonition, An admonition by the gods, omen, warning -- part. passé de moneo.
monacha -- a nun
moneris -- a vessel with a single bank of oars, galley
monitor -- one who reminds, a monitor, suggester, at your instance, An assistant who prepares a brief for a pleader, attorney, A nomenclator, secretary, An overseer, instructor, guide, teacher
monnula* -- a darling
monodia -- the song of a solo-singer
montius -- de montagne
monazon -- der Mönch
monasterialis -- monastic, monasterial
monasteriolum -- a little monastery
mono/chromatos -- one-colored, of a single color
monticellulus -- toute petite montagne.
monumentarius -- of or belonging to a monument, tomb
monimentarius -- of or belonging to a monument, tomb
monimentum -- dviser
monotropus -- of one kind, single
monumentum -- that which brings to mind, a remembrancer, memorial, monument, A monument, statue, A public work, memorial structure, monument, on the Via Appia, the temple built by Marius, the house built for Cicero by the Senate. &mdash;A memorial offering, votive offering, A sepulchral monument, sepulchre, tomb, family sepulchre, A tradition, chronicle, story, monument, record, history, black and white.&mdash;A remembrancer, mark, token, means of recognition, a memorial, record, traces and proofs
monachalis -- monacal, monastique.
monachatus* -- état monastique.
monachicus -- monkish
monastriae -- nuns
monitorius -- that serves to remind, admonish, monitory
mono/clonos -- having a single branch, shoot?
mono/cnemos -- one-legged, a one-legged man?
mono/crepis -- one-shoed, he that has but one shoe
monodiaria -- she that sings alone, a female solo-singer
mono/gramma -- a character consisting of several letters, a monogram
mono/lithus -- consisting of a single stone, monolith
mono/machia* -- a single combat, duel
mono/machus -- he who fights in single combat
mono/phonos -- d'un seul son
mono/podium -- a stand, table with one foot
mono/podius -- one-footed
mono/polium -- the exclusive privilege of dealing in, selling a thing, a monopoly
mono/pteros -- with one wing
monopticus -- Isid. borgne.
mono/ptotos -- (mot) qui n'a qu'un seul cas (avec une seule désinence - qui tombe à la fin de ce mot).
monstratio -- a showing, direction, guidance
monstrator -- an introducer, inventor, teacher, Triptolemus, of human sacrifices
monstri/fer -- monster-bearing, that produces monsters
monstriger -- monstrueux
monstrosus -- strange, preternatural, monstrous
monticulus -- a small mountain
montiuagus* -- wandering over mountains
mono/marita -- qui n'a été mariée qu'une fois
monetarius -- of or belonging to the mint -- a master of the mint, minters, coiners
monstratus -- conspicuous, remarkable -- abl. sing., a showing
monstruosus -- strange, monstrous, ill-omened;
mon/archiani -- partisans de la monarchie (trinitaire).
monasterium -- a monastery
mono/chordon -- the monochord, tonometer
mono/chordos -- of one string, Subst.
mono/chorius -- one who dances alone, who executes a pas seul
mono/chromos -- one-colored, monochromatic
mono/chronos -- of one time, of the same time, measure
mono/diarius -- a solosinger
mono/grammos -- of a mere line, outlined, sketched
mono/schemus -- Sedul. d'une seule forme.
mono/stichum -- a poem consisting of a single verse
mono/trophus* -- celui qui vit seul, un solitaire.
monstrigena* -- monster-bearing
montaniosus -- mountainous
monticellus -- a small mountain, a mount
mono/grammus -- - 1 - formé de simples lignes, linéaire. - 2 - ébauché, esquissé. -- -I. a skeleton, a shadow -II. that consist of lines merely, outlined, sketched;
moneo -- to remind, put in mind of, admonish, advise, warn, instruct, teach, as the situation suggested, to be punished, To teach, instruct, tell, inform, point out, announce, predict, foretell, inspire, foretold
monas -- unity; a unit, monad
monachium -- a monastery
monadicus -- l'unité.
monemeron -- a kind of eye-salve
monetalis -- of the mint, of money, m., the money-man, dun
mono/belus -- Lampr. raide comme une lance.
mono/bolon -- a single throw, leaping alone
mono/ceros -- a unicorn
mono/colos -- celui qui n'a qu'une jambe.
mon/oculus -- one-eyed, a one-eyed man
mono/gamia* -- a marrying of but one wife, monogamy
mono/gamus -- he who has but one wife
mono/genes -- onlybegotten, only
mono/linum -- a necklace consisting of a string of pearls
mono/loris -- with one thong
mono/meter -- consisting of one metre, monometer
mono/solis -- single-soled
mono/xylus -- that consists of a single piece of wood
montensis -- of or belonging to mountains, mountain-
monticola* -- a mountaineer
montigena* -- mountain-born
montuosus -- mountainous, full of mountains
monubilis -- reminding, admonishing
monastria -- die Nonne
mone/facio* -- ermahnen
mon/optota* -- nouns which have but one case-ending, monoptotes
mono/tonus -- uniforme, qui se suit sans interruption
mono/stichium -- a poem consisting of a single verse
mono/strophos -- composé d'une seule strophe.
mono/syllabon -- monosyllabe
mono/syllabos -- monosylllabique.
mono/syllabus* -- monosyllabic, subst., a monosyllable
monstrabilis -- worthy to be shown, noticed, conspicuous, remarkable
monstratiuus -- qui sert à montrer
monstrificus -- monstrous, strange
monstriuorus -- qui dévore les monstres
monstrositas -- unnaturalness, monstrosity
montaniculus -- Char. un peu montagneux.
monumentalis -- of or belonging to a monument, monumental
monarchianus -- ein Anhänger der Monarchie
monophtongos -- qui a un son simple
monophtongus -- qui a un son simple
monstrigenus* -- qui produit des monstres
mono/triglyphus* -- that has only one triglyph
mono/chromateus -- 
mono/schematistus -- Plot. d'une seule forme.
monstri/ficabilis -- monstrous, strange
__mona
mona/zontes -- monks
monarius -- having but one form
monaules -- a player on the single flute
monaulos -- a single flute, a flute with a single pipe
monarcha -- an absolute ruler, a monarch
monachus -- de moine, de solitaire. -- a monk
monacha -- a nun
monazon -- der Mönch
monasterialis -- monastic, monasterial
monasteriolum -- a little monastery
monachalis -- monacal, monastique.
monachatus* -- état monastique.
monachicus -- monkish
monastriae -- nuns
monarchiani -- partisans de la monarchie (trinitaire).
monasterium -- a monastery
monachium -- a monastery
monadicus -- l'unité.
monastria -- die Nonne
monarchianus -- ein Anhänger der Monarchie
__mono
monocentaurus -- monstre avec une tête de boeuf
monochromata -- paintings of but one color
monodium -- the song of a solo-singer
monoides -- having a single form
monodia -- the song of a solo-singer
monochromatos -- one-colored, of a single color
monotropus -- of one kind, single
monoclonos -- having a single branch, shoot
monocnemos -- one-legged, a one-legged man
monocrepis -- one-shoed, he that has but one shoe
monodiaria -- she that sings alone, a female solo-singer
monogramma -- a character consisting of several letters, a monogram
monolithus -- consisting of a single stone, monolith
monomachia* -- a single combat, duel
monomachus -- he who fights in single combat
monophonos -- d'un seul son
monopodium -- a stand, table with one foot
monopodius -- one-footed
monopolium -- the exclusive privilege of dealing in, selling a thing, a monopoly
monopteros -- with one wing
monopticus -- Isid. borgne.
monoptotos -- (mot) qui n'a qu'un seul cas (avec une seule désinence - qui tombe à la fin de ce mot).
monomarita -- qui n'a été mariée qu'une fois
monochordon -- the monochord, tonometer
monochordos -- of one string, Subst.
monochorius -- one who dances alone, who executes a pas seul
monochromos -- one-colored, monochromatic
monochronos -- of one time, of the same time, measure
monodiarius -- a solosinger
monogrammos -- of a mere line, outlined, sketched
monoschemus -- Sedul. d'une seule forme.
monostichum -- a poem consisting of a single verse
monotrophus* -- celui qui vit seul, un solitaire.
monogrammus -- - 1 - formé de simples lignes, linéaire. - 2 - ébauché, esquissé. -- -I. a skeleton, a shadow -II. that consist of lines merely, outlined, sketched;
monobelus -- Lampr. raide comme une lance.
monobolon -- a single throw, leaping alone
monoceros -- a unicorn
monocolos -- celui qui n'a qu'une jambe.
monoculus -- one-eyed, a one-eyed man
monogamia* -- a marrying of but one wife, monogamy
monogamus -- he who has but one wife
monogenes -- onlybegotten, only
monolinum -- a necklace consisting of a string of pearls
monoloris -- with one thong
monometer -- consisting of one metre, monometer
monosolis -- single-soled
monoxylus -- that consists of a single piece of wood
monoptota* -- nouns which have but one case-ending, monoptotes
monotonus -- uniforme, qui se suit sans interruption
monostichium -- a poem consisting of a single verse
monostrophos -- composé d'une seule strophe.
monosyllabon -- monosyllabe
monosyllabos -- monosylllabique.
monosyllabus* -- monosyllabic, subst., a monosyllable
monophtongos -- qui a un son simple
monophtongus -- qui a un son simple
monotriglyphus* -- that has only one triglyph
monochromateus -- 
monoschematistus -- Plot. d'une seule forme.
__mori
mori/gerus -- compliant, yielding, accommodating, obliging
mori/fico -- - tr. - Gloss. Isid. retarder.
mori/gero -- Plaut. c. morigeror.
morior -- to die, expire, would rather die, to his death, of desire, dying accents, may I die, if, in death, To die away, die out, expire, decay, wither, pass away
morion -- A narcotic plant, nightshade, also called
moribundus -- dying, at the point of death, moribund, in death, mortal, fatal
mori/geratio -- compliance
mori/gerator -- a complier
mori/geror -- to comply with, gratify, humor, yield
moriturio -- to desire to die
moriturus -- P. of morior
mori/ficor -- tr., retarder
__moro
Pass. impers., be spent, lost
moro/logus -- speaking foolishly, foolish, subst., a fool
morosus -- wayward, peevish, fretful, capricious, captious, hypercritical, stubborn -- lingering, slow, slow in coming
morochites -- a precious stone of the color of a leek
morochthos -- a precious stone of the color of a leek
morositas -- peevishness, fretfulness, moroseness
__mucro
a sharp point, edge, sword's point
mucronatus -- pointed
__mulie
muliebrosus -- fond of women
muliero -- to make womanish, render effeminate
muliercula -- a little woman
mulieritas -- womanhood
mulierosus -- devoted to women
muliebritas -- womanhood
mulierarius -- of a woman, hired by a woman, the band sent by Clodia, m., a woman-hunter -- a lover of women
muliebris -- of a woman, womanly, feminine, wielded by women, Womanish, effeminate, unmanly, n
muliebria -- 
mulierositas -- an excessive fondness for women
mulier/cularius -- a lover of women
__mulo*
mulomedicina -- the art of curing the diseases of mules
mulocisiarius -- one who rides in a carriage drawn by mules
mulomedicus -- a mule-doctor
__multi*
beaucoup de gens, la multitude / abondant, en grande quantité / [temps] avancé / paix avancée, paix profonde / abondant en paroles, prolixe / actif, qui se prodigue / acharné, pressant
multiangulum -- a polygon
multibibus -- much-drinking
multicauatus -- with many hollows, cavities, multicavous
multicia -- a soft dress, delicate garment2>
multifer -- bearing much, fruitful
multipes -- many-footed, multipede; Subst. m. a multipede, millipede
multito -- Cato. punir.#
multiclinatum -- polyptote (fig. de style : emploi successif du même mot à plusieurs cas).>
multiformitas -- multiformity
multinubentia -- a marrying several persons, polygamy
multipartitus* -- much divided, divided into many classes
multiplicatio -- a making manifold, increasing, multiplying
multiplicator -- a multiplier, the multiplier
multiplicatus* -- part. passé de multiplico.
multiplicitas -- multiplicity, manifoldness
multiuorantia -- gluttony
multipertitus* -- vielfältig eingeteilt, vielfältig
multifidus* -- many-cleft, divided into many parts
multinodus -- having many knots
multiplico* -- to multiply, increase, augment, enlarged
multicauus -- manyholed, spongy
multicolor -- many-colored
multicomus* -- having much hair, abounding in rays
multifacio* -- to make much of, to esteem, value highly
multifluus -- flowing copiously
multiforis -- many-doored, having many entrances, openings, holes
multiforus -- having many openings, pierced with many holes
multigenus* -- of many kinds, various
multiiugis -- yoked many together
multiiugus* -- yoked many together, manifold, various
multimeter -- many - metred, consisting of many feet, kinds of verse
multimodus -- manifold, various.
multinubus -- married to several, polygamous
multiradix -- many - rooted, having many roots
multiramis -- many-branched
multiscius -- knowing much, of great knowledge
multisonus* -- loud-sounding
multiuagus* -- that wanders about much
multiuidus* -- much-seeing
multiuocus -- Boet. qui a plusieurs synonymes.
multiuolus -- of many desires
multinodis -- having many knots
multinumus* -- that costs much money, dear, expensive
multipotens -- very powerful, very mighty
multicaulis -- many-stalked?
multifarius -- manifold, various, multifarious
multiflorus -- abounding in flowers
multifolius -- Plin. qui a beaucoup de feuilles, feuillu.
multiformis -- manyshaped, multiform, manifold
multigrumus -- much heaped up;, greatly swollen
multilaudus -- much-praised
multiloquax -- that talks much, talkative, loquacious
multiloquus -- talkative, loquacious
multinummus -- that costs much money, dear, expensive
multiplicus -- variously compounded
multisignis -- Varr. couvert d'insignes.
multigrumis -- sehr aufgehäuft
multilicius -- consisting of many threads
multiplex -- with many folds, much-winding, With many windings, full of concealed places, the labyrinth, Manifold, many times as great, far more, is exaggerated, n., many times as much, Of many parts, manifold, many, varied, complicated, Changeable, versatile, inexplicable
multitudo -- a great number, multitude, crowd, throng, The crowd, multitude, common people
multicius -- soft, splendid, transparent2>
multicola* -- a many-worshipper, one who worships many
multipeda* -- a multipede
multiplus -- Boet. multiple.
multitius -- soft, splendid, transparent2>
multiuira -- she that has had many husbands
multiuius -- having many ways, multivious
multiceps -- vielköpfig
multiangulus* -- having many angles, multangular
multicoloris -- Isid. multicolore.
multicolorus -- manycolored
multicupidus -- much-desiring, that desires much, many things
multifructus -- abounding in fruit
multigeneris -- of many kinds.
multigenerus -- of many kinds, various
multilaterus* -- qui a plusieurs côtés
multiloquium* -- a much-speaking
multinominis -- many-named
multisonalis -- much-resounding
multisonorus* -- loud-sounding
multiforabilis -- abounding in flowers
multiforatilis -- many - holed, perforated with many holes, med.
multiloquentia -- bavardage.
multiplicabilis -- manifold
multiplicatiuus -- Boet. qui multiplie, qui sert à multiplier.
__muri
muricidus -- a coward, poltroon
murilegus -- qui prend les souris
muriceus -- like a purple-fish, pointed, full of points, rough
muries -- salt liquor, brine, pickle
muricus -- a mouser
murinus -- of mice, mouse-, mouse-color, the skins of martens, ermines
muriola -- etwa mit Mostsirup versetzter Nachwein
muriaticus -- pickled, lying in brine;, subst.
muriaticum -- a pickled fish
murilegulus -- one who gathers, fishes for the purple-fish
muriatica -- Plaut. mets confits dans la saumure.
muricatus -- shaped like a purple-fish, pointed
muriculus -- a small purple-fish
__myrr
myrrhacopum -- médicament où il entre de la myrrhe
myrrhatus -- Spiced, mingled with myrrh
myrrheus -- -I. of or belonging to myrrh -II. of or belonging to the stone murra, murrean, made of murra
myrrhiza -- 
myrris -- 
myrrha -- -I. the myrrh-tree, an Arabian tree, of which myrrh was the sap -II. A stone of which costly vessels, were made, vessels of murra, murrine vases
myrrhis -- cerfeuil musqué [plante]
myrrina -- 
myrrhinus -- -I. of or belonging to myrrh. -II. of or belonging to the stone murra, murrine
myrrhites -- a precious stone of the color of myrrh
myrrhiola -- vin de myrrhe
myrrhitis -- sorte de pierre précieuse
__nasi
nasiterna -- a large watering-pot with a large nose, spout
nasiternatus -- pourvu de nasiterne.
nasica -- comm. adj., who has a large, pointed nose
__nassi
nassiterna -- a large watering-pot with a large nose, spout
nassiternatus -- provided with a large-nosed watering-pot
__nau*
nauclerius -- captain's, of/belonging to a ship's captain;
nauclericus -- of or belonging to a ship-owner, ship-master
nauculor -- to sail in a small vessel>
naufragium -- a shipwreck, in safety behold their ruin, shipwreck, ruin, loss, destruction, a plank from a wreck.&mdash;The shattered remains, wreck, remnants
naufragiosus -- full of shipwrecks, dangerous to ships
naufragosus -- orageux, fécond en naufrages, agité.
naumachia -- mock sea battle staged as spectacle/game/exercise;
nauseola -- squeamishness>
nauseosus -- that produces nausea, nauseous>
naustibulum -- a vessel shaped like a ship>
nauigatio -- a sailing, navigation, voyage>
naufragus* -- that suffers shipwreck, shipwrecked, wrecked, of the shipwrecked, m., a shipwrecked person, That causes shipwreck, shipwrecking, ruined, m
nauarchia* -- 
nauarchus* -- navarque, capitaine de navire, patron de navire.
nauclerus -- a shipowner, a ship-master, skipper; Nauclerus : the title of a comedy of C&aelig;cilius?
naufragor -- faire naufrage.
naumachus -- a naval combatant
nauphylax -- one who kept watch over the luggage on shipboard
nauseator -- one who is apt to feel nausea, who vomits easily>
nauaculum* -- a harbor>
nauicella -- a small vessel, a boat, skiff>
nauiculor* -- to sail in a small vessel
nauigator -- a sailor, mariner
nauigatus -- part. passé de navigo; parcouru par les vaisseaux.
nauta -- a sailor, seaman, mariner, boatman>
nauis -- a ship, ships of war, transports, the admiral's, decked, without a deck, laden with gold or chaff, launch, work, set sail, landed, was shipwrecked, the image of a deity as guardian, hardships of the sea, with might and main, the ship Argo, a ship#
nauia -- a ship;>
nauus -- busy, diligent, assiduous, active.#
nauticus -- of ships, of sailors, ship-, naval, nautical
nauigium -- a vessel, ship, bark, boat
naucella -- a small vessel, a boat, skiff>
naufrago -- to suffer shipwreck, be wrecked
naufulax -- one who kept watch over the luggage on shipboard
naupegus -- a shipbuilder, shipwright, ship-carpenter, med.?
nautalis -- sailor-like>
nauicula -- a small vessel, boat, skiff>
nauities -- diligence, zeal#
naufylax -- one who kept watch over the luggage on shipboard
nautilos -- the nautilus, a shell-fish so called because it sails like a vessel>
nauigans -- part. prés. de navigo. - navigans, antis, m. : navigateur.>
nauplius -- a kind of shell-fish, which sails in its shell as in a ship>
naucum -- a nutshell, trifle, negative, of no value, good for nothing, value not a straw#
nausia -- nausea; seasickness;>
nautea -- An offensive liquid, perh. bilgewater = sentina>
nauigo -- to sail, cruise, go by sea, serve as a sailor, all men's achievements in navigation, am in safety, To sail over, navigate, To sail, remove, proceed, To swim>
nauita -- a sailor, seaman, mariner>
naulum -- boat-fare, boathire>
nausco -- int., s'ouvrir en forme de bateau [en parl. de la fève]>
nausea -- sea-sickness>
nauseo -- to be sea-sick, To be squeamish, be qualmish, vomit, to belch forth, give vent to, utter, To cause disgust>
nausio -- c. nauseo.>
nausum -- a kind of Gallic ship, in carm>
nauale -- - 1 - lieu où l’on garde les vaisseaux à sec, bassin de construction, chantier de construction navale; arsenaux (à Rome). - 2 - port, rade, havre. - 3 - agrès d'un vaisseau.>
naucus -- something slight, trivial, a trifle, to value at nothing, of no value, good for nothing#
naulon -- passage-money, fare#
nauium -- der Einbaum - ein Zober#
naualis -- of ships, ship-, nautical, naval, to protect the ships, the shape of a ship, of brass from the beaks of captured ships, seamen, for repairing and fitting out a fleet, n, a place for ship-building, shipyard, dock, dock-yard, A ship's furniture, tackle, rigging>
nautici -- sailors, seamen>
naualia -- gen. plur.>
nauatus -- part. passé de navo; fait avec soin, fait avec zèle, fait avec empressement.>
naucula -- a small vessel, boat, skiff>
nauiger -- Ship-bearing, navigable>
nauitas -- promptness, assiduity, zeal#
nausi/ficus -- nauséabond.
nauigabilis -- navigable, suitable for shipping;>
naufragalis -- where many shipwrecks occur, dangerous to ships
naufragator -- a shipwrecked person
nauseabilis -- that causes nausea, vomiting>
nauticarius -- a shipmaster>
nauicularia -- the business of one who hired out small vessels for transporting passengers and goods, the shipping business>
nauicularis -- of or relating to the shipping business>
naupegarius -- constructeur de bateaux.?
nauiculator -- propriétaire d'un navire, armateur.>
naumachiarius -- of a lake constructed for mock sea battles staged as spectacle/game/exercise; -- of or for a mock sea-fight
naufragabilis -- dangerous to ships
naupegiarius -- a ship-carpenter?
nauseabundus -- inclined to vomit>
nauicularius -- of a small vessel, m., a boat-owner, ship-master, f, the business of hiring out boats, shipping business -- propriétaire d'un navire, armateur.>
__naui
nauifragus -- causing shipwrecks, dangerous
nauigiolum -- a small vessel, a bark. boat
nauigatio -- a sailing, navigation, voyage
nauicella -- a small vessel, a boat, skiff
nauiculor* -- to sail in a small vessel
nauigator -- a sailor, mariner
nauigatus -- part. passé de navigo; parcouru par les vaisseaux.
nauigium -- a vessel, ship, bark, boat
nauicula -- a small vessel, boat, skiff
nauities -- diligence, zeal
nauigans -- part. prés. de navigo. - navigans, antis, m. : navigateur.
nauigo -- to sail, cruise, go by sea, serve as a sailor, all men's achievements in navigation, am in safety, To sail over, navigate, To sail, remove, proceed, To swim
nauita -- a sailor, seaman, mariner
nauium -- der Einbaum - ein Zober
nauiger -- Ship-bearing, navigable
nauitas -- promptness, assiduity, zeal
nauigabilis -- navigable, suitable for shipping;
nauicularia -- the business of one who hired out small vessels for transporting passengers and goods, the shipping business
nauicularis -- of or relating to the shipping business
nauiculator -- propriétaire d'un navire, armateur.
nauicularius -- of a small vessel, m., a boat-owner, ship-master, f, the business of hiring out boats, shipping business -- propriétaire d'un navire, armateur.
__nigre
nigre/facio -- to make black, to blacken, Pass.
nigresco -- to become black, grow dark;
nigredo -- blackness, black color
__nite
nite/facio -- to make shining
nitelinus -- gris de souris.
nitedula -- a small mouse, dormouse
nitela -- brightness, splendor -- a small mouse, a dormouse
nitens -- shining, glittering, brilliant, bright, Fine, in good condition, handsome, blooming, sleek, illustrious, brilliant, elegant -- P. of nitor
nitella -- c. nitela.
nitesco -- to begin to shine, shine forth, glitter, despairs of treating effectively
nitellinus* -- of or belonging to a, dormouse, the color of a dormouse
nitefactus -- part. passé de nitefacio; rendu brillant.
__niti
nitidiusculus -- somewhat more shining
nitidulus -- somewhat spruce, rather trim
nitiditas -- splendor, beauty
nitido -- to make bright, shining, to polish, smooth
nitidus -- shining, glittering, bright, polished, clear, with gleaming scales, sleek, plump, in good condition, well-favored, blooming, rich, cultivated, polished, refined
nitibundus -- pressing against, straining, striving
__nocti*
nocticola -- fond of the night
noctiluca -- that shines by night, the moon
noctiuagus -- night-wandering, that wanders by night
noctiuidus -- night-seeing; that sees by night;
noctiuigilus -- night-watching
noctifer -- the eveningstar
nocticolor -- nightcolored, black
nocticulus -- nocturne.>
noctilucus* -- qui luit pendant la nuit.
noctisurgium -- a getting up in the night
__noctu*
noctulucus -- watching, waking, seeing at night
noctuuigilus -- night-watching
nocturnus -- of night, by night, nocturnal, by night
noctuinus -- of or belonging to night-owls
nocturnalis -- nocturnal>
noctuabundus -- in the night-time, by night
__nubi>
nubi/fugus -- cloud-chasing
nubi/gena -- cloud-born, born of clouds, of a cloud
nubigosus -- full of clouds, cloudy>
nubiuagus -- wandering among the clouds
nubi/ficus -- producing clouds
nubi/genus* -- qui engendre des nuages
nubilosus -- cloudy
nubicula -- c. nubecula.
nubilare -- a shed, barn3>
nubila -- clouds, rain-clouds
nubilo -- to be cloudy, overcast; to make cloudy, to overcast
nubilum -- clouds (pl.), rain clouds;
nubilus -- cloudy, overcast, lowering, cloud-bringing, Dark, gloomy, gloomy, sad, melancholy, unpropitious
nubi/fer -- cloudbearing, cloud-capped
nubiger -- borne by the clouds
nubilis -- marriageable2>
nubilarium -- hangar [où l'on abrite le blé contre la pluie].3>
__nuci*
nucifragibulum -- ein Nußknacker - vom Zahn
nucifrangibulum -- a nut-cracker, tooth
nucipersicum -- a peach grafted on a nut-tree, a nut-peach, in lemm.
nuciprunum -- a plum grafted on a nut-tree, a nut-plum
nucicla -- amande.#
nucifer -- qui porte des noix.
nucinus* -- of a nut-tree>
__nummu*
nummulariolus -- a money-changer.>
nummulus* -- a bit of money, coin, for filthy lucre>
nummularius -- of or belonging to moneychanging; Subst. m. a money-changer, moneybroker>
__numu*
numulariolus -- a money-changer, med.>
numulus* -- some money, money>
numularius -- of or belonging to moneychanging;>
__paeda*
paedagogatus -- education, instruction
paedagogianus -- of or belonging to the, reared to serve at court
paedagogus -- a governor, preceptor, pedagogue (a slave to guide and attend children)
paedagogium -- the place where boys of servile birth intended for pages were educated, the pages' hall
paedagoga -- a governess
paedagogo -- to educate, instruct
__paede
paederotinus -- de la couleur de la pierre dite paederos
paederos -- A precious stone.
__paludi*
paludiuagus -- wandering about, among morasses
paludifer -- marsh-making, swamp-making
__pan
panchrestus -- good for everything, universally useful
panchristus -- good, useful for every thing
pandecta -- a book that contains every thing, a complete repertory, an encyclopedia
pandemus -- affecting all the people, public, general
pandura -- pandore (luth à trois cordes, invention de Pan).
paneros -- I. a precious stone, supposed to have the property of making fruitful II. Paneros : a Roman surname, a slavename?
pangito -- - tr. - Gloss. louer?
panicum -- Italian panic-grass#
pani/fex -- a breadmaker, baker2
panneus -- ragged, tattered3
panosus -- like bread2
panther -- -I. a panther -II. a hunting-net#
panucla -- bobine ou navette.
pannuli -- rags, ragged clothes3
panulia -- bobine ou navette.#
panacea -- an herb said to heal all diseases, all-heal, panacea, catholicon
panarium -- breadbasket;2
panthera -- a panther#
panarius -- a bread-seller2
panchrus -- a variegated precious stone#
pandatio -- a warping#
pandatus -- de pando#
pangonus* -- a precious stone#
panicium -- Any thing baked, bread, cakes2
panicula -- - 1 - Plin. panicule (t. de botan.). - 2 - Apul. sorte de tumeur.#
panifica -- a female baker; plur.2
pannaria -- presents of cloth#
pannosus -- full of rags, ragged, tattered.3
pannucea -- rags3
pannulus -- a small piece of cloth, a rag3
pantices -- the paunch, the bowels, sausages#
panucula -- bobine ou navette.#
pandemos -- endémique.
pannucia -- haillon, guenille#
paniceus -- made of bread2
pannus -- a piece of cloth, garment of cloth, A rag, patch, tatters3
pandus -- bent, crooked, curved, crook-backed#
panaca -- a kind of drinking-vessel#
panion -- a plant, also called#
pannum -- Dat., abl. plur., a cloth, a garment.3
pansus -- part. passé de pando, ĕre; tendu, étendu, déployé.#
pantex -- intestin, panse, abdomen.#
pandia -- sorte de pierre précieuse#
pannis -- [arch.], c. pannus#
pantomimus -- mime performer in a pantomime#
panaricium -- a disease of the finger-nails#
panariolum -- a small bread-basket2
pancarpius -- consisting, composed of all kinds of fruits.
panchromos -- a plant, called also#
pancratias -- a pancratiast#
pancration -- A complete combat; a gymnastic contest which included both wrestling and boxing;4
pancratium -- a gymnastic contest, including wrestling and boxing4
pandiculor* -- to stretch one's self#
panerastos -- a precious stone, supposed to have the property of making fruitful#
panicellus -- a little loaf2
panificium -- the making of bread.2
pannositas -- raggedness, flabbiness3
pannychius -- that lasts all night
panchresta -- gâteaux, friandises#
pancratius -- Pancratian, a trochaic metre, consisting of a#
paneficium -- the making of bread.2
panniculus -- a bit of cloth, rag, of silk -- c. paniculus.3
pannunculus -- c. panniculus.3
pansebastus -- sorte de pierre précieuse (al. panerastos)#
pantherinus -- of a panther, panthers.#
pannuceatus -- ragged, tattered3
pantophobos -- qui craint tout#
panuuellium -- #
pant/agathus -- A bird of good omen
panacinus* -- made of the panacea
pancarpus -- consisting, composed of all kinds of fruits.
pandectes -- a book that contains every thing, a complete repertory, an encyclopedia
pandorium -- c. pandura.
pandorius -- c. pandura.
pandurium -- a musical instrument of three strings, invented by Pan#
pandurizo -- to play the#
paniculus -- a tuft, a panicle#
pannarius -- of or pertaining to cloth; subst.3
pannuceus -- ragged, tattered.3
pannucius -- ragged, tattered.3
pantelium -- a holocaust offered in the worship of Mithras#
pantheris -- femelle de la panthère#
pantomima -- a female ballet-dancer, pantomime#
panuncula -- the thread wound upon the bobbin3
pandecter -- the title of the fourth book of the work of Apicius.#
pandurius -- #
pangonius* -- a precious stone#
pannarium -- a bread-basket2
pantherum -- v. panther.#
pantopola -- v. seplasiarius.#
pango -- to fasten, make fast, fix, drive in, to make, compose, write, record, celebrate, contrive, To fix, settle, determine, agree upon, agree, covenant, conclude, stipulate, contract, To promise in marriage, betroth, the marriage contract#
panis -- bread, a loaf, coarse bread, black bread, A loaf, lump, mass2
pando -- to spread out, extend, unfold, expand, extends, open out, is not yet full, To throw open, open, lay open, disclose, split, open, to spread, extend, extend their influence, To open, to unfold, make known, publish, reveal, explain -- Act., to bend, bow, curve#
panax -- An herb to which was ascribed the power of healing all diseases, all-heal, panacea, catholicon#
panus -- the thread wound upon the bobbin3
pansa -- broad-footed, splay-foot#
pancarpineus -- composed of all kinds of fruits
pannuuellium -- the wound-up yarn of the woof, the bobbin of the shuttle, with the yarn wound upon it
pannychismus -- a watching all night long
pantomimicus -- of or belonging to pantomimes, pantomimic#
pancratiasta -- pancratiaste, athlète, qui combat au pancrace#
pannicularia -- rags, tatters, ragged clothes3
pantherocamelus* -- v. camelopardalis.#
panathenaicon -- an ointment made in Athens#
pancratiastes -- a combatant in the, a pancratiast#
pannicularius -- of or belonging to rags, tatters3
pannuncularia -- c. pannicularia.3
pancratiarius -- c. pancratiastes#
panicoctarius -- bread-making2
panchrestarius -- a confectioner
__pane
bread, a loaf.
panegyricus -- of a public assembly, festival, As -- -I. the festival oration of Isocrates, in which he eulogized the Athenians -II. a eulogy, panegyric
panegyrista -- a eulogist, panegyrist
paneros -- I. a precious stone, supposed to have the property of making fruitful II. Paneros : a Roman surname, a slavename
panerastos -- a precious stone, supposed to have the property of making fruitful
pane/ficium -- the making of bread.
__par
equal, of equal size, equally criminal, horsemen against horsemen, not equal to the task, indecisive, peers in song, as large as, extremely rare, meet, like, equals, Equal, a match, not on an equality, an adversary, with equal speed, Equal, well-matched, suitable, adequate, kindred spirits, birds of a feather flock together, esse, fit, meet, suitable, proper, right, respondeo or refero, like for like, tit for tat, give as good as you get, to play, even and odd, m, a companion, fellow, comrade, mate, spouse, n., a pair, couple
a companion, comrade, mate, spouse
a pair
parhippus -- an extra horse
paricida -- ING
parento -- to offer a solemn sacrifice in honor of dead kindred, To bring an offering to the dead parent, avenge the dead, to appease, satisfy
partior -- to share, part, distribute, apportion, divide
paratus -- a preparation, provision, outfit, want of preparation, clothing -- prepared, ready, Well prepared, provided, furnished, fitted, equipped, skilled, learned, versed, a master in dissimulation, n., nothing is ready, contentment
parilis -- equal, like
paramus -- mot espagnol), plateau inculte
paratio -- a preparing, procuring, compassing the crown
parcens -- sparing, niggardly
pariens -- P. of 2 pario, As
parison -- an even balance in the members of a sentence
paritas -- equality, parity
paritor -- a servant, attendant, body-guard
parmula -- a little shield
parodia -- a reply retaining nearly the same words or the same turn, a parody
parotis -- a tumor near the ears, a parotis
partito -- distributively
partura -- bearing
paramma -- selle de cuir pour les mulets (
parator -- a preparer, contriver
parocha -- a supplying of necessaries, purveyance
parturio -- to desire to bring forth, be in travail, labor, great cry and little wool, To be big with, be pregnant with, brood over, meditate, purpose, To be in pain, be anxious, be troubled, To bring forth, produce, yield, generate, is budding forth
paruolus -- very small, very young; unimportant; slight, petty;
paruulus -- very small, very young; unimportant; slight, petty;
parabole -- a comparison.
paradoxi -- - 1 - mimes (acteurs). - 2 - athlètes qui remportent une victoire inattendue.
paragoge -- a lengthening of a word, the addition of a letter or syllable to a word, paragoge
paralios -- that grows by the seaside
paralius -- that grows by the seaside
paramese -- the string next to the middle;, the next to the middle note, in the treble
paranete -- the last string but one;, the note next to the highest
parapsis -- ing
parasita -- a female parasite
parastas -- a four-cornered pillar, column, a pilaster
paratura -- a preparing, preparation
parcitas -- sparingness, parsimony
pardalis -- a female panther
paredros -- that sits by one's side, remains with one
parelion -- a mock sun, parhelion
parentia -- obéissance.
pareoron -- a plant
parergon -- an extra ornament, Plur.
pariatio -- a balancing, settling
pariator -- a balancer, settler
pariatus -- part. passé de pario, pariare.
parmatus* -- bearing the parma, with light shields, light-armed
parochia -- an ecclesiastical district, a parish, med.
parochus -- a purveyor, provincial officer, required to entertain travelling magistrates
paroecia -- - 1 - Sid. Hier. Aug. paroisse. - 2 - Sid. église (édifice).
paroemia -- a proverb
paropsis -- a small dish for delicacies, dessert-dish
paropter -- vase à rôtir
paroptus -- roasted on the outside, slightly roasted
parsurus -- (Lebaigue P. 894) part. fut. de parco.
particus -- Gloss. marchand en détail, détaillant.
partilis -- divisible, single, Adv.
partitio -- a sharing, parting, partition, division, distribution, method of dividing an inheritance, a logical division, partition, distribution of topics
partitor -- a divider, distributer
partitus -- P. of partio and of partior
paruitas -- smallness, littleness, slightness
parygrus -- un peu humide, moite
paradoxa -- 
parifico -- rendre égal
paronyma -- paronymes
parotida -- v. parotis.
partecta -- die Seitenhallen
pararius -- of or belonging to a pair -- an agent, factor, broker, the go-between
paredrus -- qui assiste qqn
parcus -- sparing, frugal, thrifty, economical, niggardly, stingy, penurious, parsimonious, of poverty, Sparing, chary, moderate, moderate, Spare, scanty, little, small, slight
parreo -- to appear, be visible, be at hand, are intelligible, it is clear, is evident, is manifest, if it be proved.&mdash;To obey, be obedient, submit, comply, is swayed by, To be subject, be dependent, be subservient, must be slave or master, To submit, comply, indulge, gratify, yield, To satisfy, fulfil, accomplish, pay
paries -- a wall (of a building)
paruus -- little, small, petty, puny, inconsiderable, small, short, little, young, the little ones, a little man, in childhood, from infancy, short, brief, little, insignificant, trifling, small, petty, unimportant, both small and great, little, small, low, mean, vile, n., a little, trifle, with little, a very little more, little I care, of little value, it matters little, cared little for
pardus -- a male panther
parens -- a procreator, father, mother, parent, to be revered as a father, A grandparent, progenitor, ancestor, ancestral, relations, kinsfolk, kindred, a father, founder, inventor, author, Jupiter -- obedient, m, subjects
partio -- to share, part, distribute, apportion, divide, separated by the barriers -- a bearing, bringing forth, a laying
partus -- a bearing, bringing forth, birth, delivery, beginnings.&mdash; Young, offspring, foal -- gained, acquired, n., an acquisition, possession, store, the conquests of
pareas -- a kind of snake
parias -- a kind of snake
parito -- to prepare, get ready, be about
parsio -- Gloss. acton d'épargner, épargne.
partor -- v. postpartor.
paruum -- voir parvus.
parrus -- c. parra
parada -- a cover, an awning
parsimonia -- frugality, thrift, parsimony, temperance;
partiarius -- that shares with another; shared, that is shared with another, that is shared with many
paraclitus -- An advocate, defender, helper, protector, comforter
paraenesis -- an exhortation, admonition, precept; gen. plur.
paragaudis -- a border, lace
paragramma -- an error in writing
parallelos -- paraliel, absol., parallels of latitude
parallelus -- parallèle.
paranympha -- a bridesmaid
paraphasis -- c. detuitio
paraphoros -- bad, of an inferior sort
paraplexia -- paraplégie
parapycnos -- 
parastates -- c. parastas
paratarius -- easily procured
parazonium -- a dagger, in lemm.
parcimonia -- ƒx
parectatos -- déjà grand garçon, jeune homme
parentalia -- A festival in honor of dead relations
parentalis -- of parents, parental, of my parents, Of the festival in honor of dead parents and kindred, an annual observance, n, a festival in honor of dead kindred
parentatio -- funeral obsequies for parents, near relatives
pariatoria -- a balancing, settling
parietalis -- of or belonging to walls
parietinae -- fallen walls, ruins
parietinus -- of or belonging to walls
paronychia -- Plin. panaris.
paroptesis -- action de rôtir légèrement
parthenice -- a plant, parthenium
partibilis -- divisible
parturitio -- a desiring to bring forth, labor, travail
parunculus -- a small boat, a little bark
paruulitas -- tendre enfance.
parabalani -- infirmiers
parangaria -- a service over and above that which one is bound to render, extra service
parapienos -- a foot in poetry
pardaliace -- aconit [plante]
parecbasis -- digression
paregorizo -- to soothe, alleviate, assuage
parentiuus -- des parents, relatif aux parents
parhomoeon -- v. paromoeon.
parietaria -- the herb pellitory, parietary
parimembre -- gleichgebildete Redeglieder
parturiens -- 
paruipendo* -- 
parentatus -- offert dans les Parentales -- c. parentatio
parthenion -- nom de différentes plantes [matricaire, mercuriale, et surtout pariétaire]
parthenium -- the name of several plants.
parasiticus -- parasitic;
parricidium -- the murder of a father, assassination of parents, parricide, The murder of a near kinsman, Parricide, treason, horrible crime, high treason
parabolanus -- a sick-nurse
paragraphus* -- paragraphe, marque pour distinguer les différentes parties d'un exposé
parangarius -- that is done besides the service to which one is bound
paranymphus -- a bridesman, fem.
parapaestus -- a foot in poetry
parapeteuma -- a ticket for which corn was received, a corn-ticket
paraphrasis -- a paraphrase
parasitatio -- a playing the parasite, sponging
parastatica -- c. parastas / os styloïde [dans la jambe du cheval]
parastichis -- an acrostic
parasynaxis -- a secret, unlawful assembly
paraueredus -- an extra post-horse
parcepromus -- ladre, avare.
parcimonium -- Inscr. économie, épargne.
paregoricus* -- alleviating, assuaging
paremphatus* -- avec la désignation précise de la personne.
parenthesis -- 1 - parenthèse (ce qu'on intercale dans le discours). 2 - épenthèse (insertion d'une lettre ou d'une syllabe dans un mot).
parietarius -- of or belonging to walls
parmularius -- An adherent of the party of the, who were armed with the, a Parmularian
paroemiacum -- vers parémiaque [anapestique dimètre catalectique]
paronomasia -- a figure of speech
paronychium -- a whitlow, neutr.
parsimonium -- Inscr. économie, épargne.
parthenicon -- a plant, called also
participium -- a sharing, partaking, participation.
parturialis -- en train d'être couvé [en parl. d'un oeuf]
paruicollis -- short-necked
paragaudius -- bordé
parangariae -- corvées (prestations) extraordinaires
parcipromus -- one that gives sparingly, a niggard, curmudgeon
parimembris -- à membres de phrase égaux
parochensis -- parochial
paronychiae -- envies
paruipensio -- mépris, piètre estime
paralyticus -- a paralytic, a palsied person -- a paralytic, a palsied person
parasitus -- a toad-eater, sponge, tuft-hunter, parasite
parricida* -- one who slays his father, a murderer of his parent, parricide, A murderer of a near kinsman, An assassin of the chief magistrate, A murderer, assassin, A parricide, outlaw, traitor, desperate criminal
particeps -- sharing, partaking, participant, m., a partner, comrade, fellow-soldier
parabilis -- easily procured, easy to be had, accessible, at hand
paradigma -- an example, paradigm
paradoxon -- A figure of speech.
paragauda -- a border, lace
paragogus -- dérivé [t. de gram.]
paralysis -- palsy, paralysis
parapegma -- a table of astronomical calculations
parasanga -- a Persian league, a parasang
parasceue -- the day of preparation, the day before the Sabbath
parasemum -- the ensign, flag of a ship
parasitor -- to play the parasite, to sponge
parastata -- a square pillar, column, a pilaster
pardalios -- a precious stone spotted like a panther, jasper
pardalium -- a kind of ointment that smells like a panther
paregoria -- alleviation, ease
parembole -- ornements ajoutés
parentela -- relationship
parhelion -- parhélie.
parhypate -- the string next to the uppermost, the note next to the highest
pariambus -- A metrical foot consisting of a short and two long syllables
parichrus -- sorte de pierre précieuse blanche comme le marbre de Paros
parientia -- obedience
parilitas -- equality
paromoeon -- rapprochement de mots qui se ressemblent [fig. de rhét.]
parthenis -- a plant, called also
partialis -- partiel.
participo -- to make partaker, for a community of interests.&mdash; To share, impart, To share in, partake of, participate in
particula -- a small part, little bit, particle, grain, jot, specimen
particulo -- a sharer, partaker, participator
partitudo -- a bearing, bringing forth, parturition
partualis -- of or belonging to bearing, birth
paradoxos -- wider Erwarten, wunderbar, seltsam, paradox - wider Erwarten Sieger - das Hinhalten - die Spannung - ein paradoxer Satz - paradoxe Sätze
paradoxus -- marvellous, strange, contrary to all expectation, paradoxical;, subst. m. one who, contrary to expectation, has conquered both in the lucta and in the pancratium on the same day
paronymon -- das Paronymum
parrhesia -- liberté d'allure [fig. de rhét.]
paradisus -- a park.
parhedrus -- parèdre, assesseur, qui assiste.
parietina -- v. parietarius.
pariturus -- 1 - part. fut. de pareo. 2 - part. fut. de parĭo, ĕre. -- de pareo.
parco -- to act sparingly, be sparing, spare, refrain from, use moderately, reserve for your children, to spare, preserve by sparing, treat with forbearance, use carefully, not injure, show mercy, avoid a disagreeable topic, To abstain, refrain, forbear, leave off, desist, stop, cease, let alone, omit, refuse, abstain from, cease from, shrink from facing, refrain from, gerund.
pareo -- to appear, be visible, be at hand, are intelligible, it is clear, is evident, is manifest, if it be proved.&mdash;To obey, be obedient, submit, comply, is swayed by, To be subject, be dependent, be subservient, must be slave or master, To submit, comply, indulge, gratify, yield, To satisfy, fulfil, accomplish, pay
pario -- to bring forth, bear, give birth, drop, lay, spawn, produce, to produce, create, effect, accomplish, devise, invent, procure, acquire, obtain -- to make equal
parma -- a small round shield, light shield, target (for cavalry or light infantry)
parda -- panthère.
parta -- Col. celle qui a enfanté. -- acquisitions, possessions
parus -- a titmouse, tomtit
parra -- a bird of ill omen, screech-owl
parciloquium* -- a speaking sparingly, reserve in conversation
paracentesis -- a perforation, a couching, tapping
paracharagma -- fausse monnaie, faux coin
paracynanche -- an inflammation of one side of the throat
paradiastole -- a figure of speech, in which two different but similar things are put together and distinguished
paradisiacus -- of or belonging to Paradise, Paradisiacal, Paradise
parapetasius -- covering, that serves to cover, shelter;, penthouses, sheds
paraphrastes -- one that paraphrases, a paraphrast
parasiopesis -- a figure of rhetoric, where one says he will not speak of such and such a thing, but, in the very act of so doing, suggests it
parasitaster -- a sorry parasite
parastaticus -- of or belonging to pilasters, parastatic
parasynanche -- parasquinancie
paratragoedo -- to express one's self in a tragic, pompous manner
parricidalis -- pertaining to, producing the crime of parricide, parricidal, murderous.
parricidatus -- parricide
participalis -- sharing, partaking, participant, participial
participatio -- a sharing, partaking, participation
participatum -- participe
particularis -- of or concerning a part, partial, particular, Adv.
particulatio -- a dividing into small parts, pieces
paruibibulus* -- that drinks little
paranatellon -- qui se lève auprès [en parl. des astres]
paraparopsis -- a large square dish for the dessert, a dessert-dish;, a small dish
parastaticae -- 
paricidialis -- pertaining to, producing the crime of parricide, parricidal, murderous, Adv.
participator -- a participator
paruiloquium* -- sobriété de paroles
participatus -- part. p. de participo. -- a sharing, participation, partnership
paracenterium -- a surgical instrument for making a perforation, a couching-needle
paracharactes -- a counterfeiter of coin
paralleloneus -- c. parallelos.
parallelonius -- parallel
paranarrhinon -- v. antirrhinon
parricidialis -- pertaining to, producing the crime of parricide, parricidal, murderous, Adv.
participialis -- of the nature of a participle, participial, Adv.
parenticidium -- der Elternmord
parrhesiastes -- a free-speaker
parturibundus -- in travail
paracharaximus* -- counterfeit
paradigmaticos -- cité comme exemple
participabilis -- qui a part, qui participe, participant
parhomoeologia* -- concession dont on se prévaut contre son adversaire
paruipendentia -- mépris, piètre estime
parallelepipedum -- parallélépipède
parallelogrammus -- consisting of parallel lines
__para
parabolus -- a reckless fellow
paracletus -- An advocate, defender, helper, protector, comforter
paraganda -- bordure d'or ou de soie sur un vêtement / paragaude, vêtement avec bordure
paragogia -- aqueducts
paragoricus -- v. paregoricus.
parapherna -- the separate possessions of a married woman, her property besides her dower
paraplecti -- frappés de paraplégie ou paralysie partielle, paraplectiques
paratus -- a preparation, provision, outfit, want of preparation, clothing -- prepared, ready, Well prepared, provided, furnished, fitted, equipped, skilled, learned, versed, a master in dissimulation, n., nothing is ready, contentment
paramus -- mot espagnol), plateau inculte
paratio -- a preparing, procuring, compassing the crown
paramma -- selle de cuir pour les mulets (
parator -- a preparer, contriver
parabole -- a comparison.
paradoxi -- - 1 - mimes (acteurs). - 2 - athlètes qui remportent une victoire inattendue.
paragoge -- a lengthening of a word, the addition of a letter or syllable to a word, paragoge
paralios -- that grows by the seaside
paralius -- that grows by the seaside
paramese -- the string next to the middle;, the next to the middle note, in the treble
paranete -- the last string but one;, the note next to the highest
parapsis -- ing
parasit/a -- a female parasite
parastas -- a four-cornered pillar, column, a pilaster
paratura -- a preparing, preparation
paradoxa -- 
pararius -- of or belonging to a pair -- an agent, factor, broker, the go-between
parada -- a cover, an awning
paraclitus -- An advocate, defender, helper, protector, comforter
paraenesis -- an exhortation, admonition, precept; gen. plur.
paragaudis -- a border, lace
paragramma -- an error in writing
parallelos -- paraliel, absol., parallels of latitude
parallelus -- parallèle.
paranympha -- a bridesmaid
paraphasis -- c. detuitio
paraphoros -- bad, of an inferior sort
paraplexia -- paraplégie
parapycnos -- 
parastates -- c. parastas
paratarius -- easily procured
parazonium -- a dagger, in lemm.
parabalani -- infirmiers
parangaria -- a service over and above that which one is bound to render, extra service
parapienos -- a foot in poetry
parasit/icus -- parasitic;
parabolanus -- a sick-nurse
para/graphus* -- paragraphe, marque pour distinguer les différentes parties d'un exposé
parangarius -- that is done besides the service to which one is bound
paranymphus -- a bridesman, fem.
parapaestus -- a foot in poetry
parapeteuma -- a ticket for which corn was received, a corn-ticket
para/phrasis -- a paraphrase
parasit/atio -- a playing the parasite, sponging
parastatica -- c. parastas / os styloïde [dans la jambe du cheval]
parastichis -- an acrostic
para/synaxis -- a secret, unlawful assembly
paraueredus -- an extra post-horse
paragaudius -- bordé
parangariae -- corvées (prestations) extraordinaires
paralyticus -- a paralytic, a palsied person -- a paralytic, a palsied person
parasit/us -- a toad-eater, sponge, tuft-hunter, parasite
parabilis -- easily procured, easy to be had, accessible, at hand
para/digma -- an example, paradigm
paradoxon -- A figure of speech.
paragauda -- a border, lace
paragogus -- dérivé [t. de gram.]
paralysis -- palsy, paralysis
parapegma -- a table of astronomical calculations
parasanga -- a Persian league, a parasang
parasceue -- the day of preparation, the day before the Sabbath
parasemum -- the ensign, flag of a ship
parasit/or -- to play the parasite, to sponge
parastata -- a square pillar, column, a pilaster
para/doxos -- wider Erwarten, wunderbar, seltsam, paradox - wider Erwarten Sieger - das Hinhalten - die Spannung - ein paradoxer Satz - paradoxe Sätze
para/doxus -- marvellous, strange, contrary to all expectation, paradoxical;, subst. m. one who, contrary to expectation, has conquered both in the lucta and in the pancratium on the same day
para/disus -- a park.
paracentesis -- a perforation, a couching, tapping
para/charagma -- fausse monnaie, faux coin
paracynanche -- an inflammation of one side of the throat
paradiastole -- a figure of speech, in which two different but similar things are put together and distinguished
paradisiacus -- of or belonging to Paradise, Paradisiacal, Paradise
parapetasius -- covering, that serves to cover, shelter;, penthouses, sheds
para/phrastes -- one that paraphrases, a paraphrast
parasiopesis -- a figure of rhetoric, where one says he will not speak of such and such a thing, but, in the very act of so doing, suggests it
parasit/aster -- a sorry parasite
parastat/icus -- of or belonging to pilasters, parastatic
parasynanche -- parasquinancie
para/tragoedo -- to express one's self in a tragic, pompous manner
para/natellon -- qui se lève auprès [en parl. des astres]
paraparopsis -- a large square dish for the dessert, a dessert-dish;, a small dish
parastaticae -- 
para/centerium -- a surgical instrument for making a perforation, a couching-needle
para/charactes -- a counterfeiter of coin
parallel/oneus -- c. parallelos.
parallel/onius -- parallel
paranarrhinon -- v. antirrhinon
para/charaximus* -- counterfeit
para/digmaticos -- cité comme exemple
parallel/epipedum -- parallélépipède
parallelo/grammus -- consisting of parallel lines
__paradisi*
paradisicola -- a dweller in Paradise, in heaven
paradisiacus -- of or belonging to Paradise, Paradisiacal, Paradise>
__paradisia*
paradisiacola -- qui habite le paradis.
paradisiacus -- of or belonging to Paradise, Paradisiacal, Paradise>
__parallelo*
parallelogrammum -- parallélogramme
paralleloneus -- c. parallelos.>
parallelonius -- parallel>
parallelogrammus -- consisting of parallel lines
__parenti*
parenticida -- a parricide
parentiuus -- des parents, relatif aux parents>
parenticidium -- der Elternmord
__pate
patefacio -- to lay open, open, throw open, opened, at the breaches, made visible, to disclose, expose, detect, bring to light, convicted
patesco -- to be laid open, be opened, open, To stretch out, extend, to be disclosed, become visible, be manifest
patetae -- a kind of dates
patetus -- subst.
patella -- a small pan, little dish, platter, A vessel used in sacrifices, offeringdish
paternus -- of a father, fatherly, paternal, against the father, Of the fatherland, of a native country
patenula* -- eine kleine Pfanne
patens -- open, accessible, unobstructed, passable, n., a broad expanse, breaches, open, exposed, Evident, manifest
patera -- a low bowl, flattened dish, saucer, libation-saucer, golden cups
patena -- a broad, shallow dish, pan, stewpan
pateti -- dattes sèches
patefactio -- a laying open, discovery
patefactus -- asco
paternitas -- fatherly feeling, care
paterculus -- Not.-Tir. dim. de pater.
patellarius -- of or belonging to a dish, plate, platter-gods, the Lares
__patri
patriciatus -- the rank, dignity of the patricians, a high dignity at the imperial court
patrimoniolum -- a little patrimony
patrius -- of a father, fatherly, paternal, ancestral / of a native country, of home, native, a national song
patrium -- 
patrizo -- to take after one's father
patricii -- a patrician, a member of the Roman nobility
patricus -- of or belonging to a father, fatherly, paternal;
patrimus -- that has a father living
patriota -- a countryman
patrisso -- to take after a father, act the father
patritus -- of a father
patri/archa -- the father, chief of a tribe, a patriarch.
patri/monium -- an inheritance from a father, paternal estate, inheritance, patrimony, an inheritance, patrimony
patriarches -- the father, chief of a tribe, a patriarch.
patrioticus -- of or belonging to one's native land
patricidium -- der Vatermord
patriciolus -- dim. de patricius.
patricida* -- one who slays his father, a murderer of his parent, parricide, A murderer of a near kinsman, An assassin of the chief magistrate, A murderer, assassin, A parricide, outlaw, traitor, desperate criminal
patricius -- of fatherly dignity, of senatorial rank, of the patricians, patrician, noble, m, a patrician, nobleman, noble lady, the patricians, nobility, to be adopted into a plebeian family
patritius -- of the rank, dignity of the, belonging to the patricians, patrician, noble, Via Urbana
patri/archalis -- patriarcal, de patriarche.
patri/archicus -- of or belonging to a patriarch, patriarchal
patri/monialis -- of or belonging to a patrimony, patrimonial
patripassiani -- believers in the doctrine of No&euml;tus, that the Supreme Father suffered in the death of Jesus
__pede
pedeplana -- rooms on the ground-floor
pedester -- on foot, pedestrian, infantry, of a foot-soldier, On land, by land, the roads by land, not elevated, not versified, in prose, Plain, common, prosaic
__pedi*
pedicinus -- the foot of a press>
pedicosus -- full of lice, lousy#
peditastellus -- a wretched foot-soldier, tramp?
peditum -- pet, vent.#
pediculo -- avoir la maladie pédiculaire, être atteint de phtiriasis.#
pediclus -- a little foot.>
pedica -- a fetter, springe, snare>
pedico -- to perform anal intercourse; to commit sodomy with; -- der Knabenschänder#
pedito -- to go on foot?
pedisequus -- a follower on foot, footman, servant, page, lackey -- that follows on foot, subst.
pedicellus -- a little louse#
pedicularis -- of or belonging to lice, pedicular, lousewort
pediculatio -- phtiriasis.
pediculosus* -- full of lice, lousy
pedisequa -- a female attendant, waiting-woman, handmaid
peditatus -- foot-soldiers, foot, infantry -- d'infanterie.?
pedicator -- pédéraste, amant (d'un homme).#
pedisecus -- that follows on foot, subst.
pediculus -- -I. a little foot. -II. a louse, another name for the, med. -- pou#
pedicularius -- of or belonging to lice, pedicular -- one who pressed the scabellum with his foot, a time-marker#
__pedo*
to break wind;
to foot, to furnish with feet;
one who has broad feet, a splay-foot
pedocucullus -- a covering for the feet
__pen
pen/insula -- a peninsula
pen/ultimus -- the last but one
penetro -- to enter, penetrate, betake oneself, thus far, press into, to pierce, sink, enter, penetrate, impressed
pen/uria -- want, need, scarcity, destitution
pen/ator -- one who carries provisions3
pend/ens -- Hanging;
pendigo -- an internal tumor, abscess
pennula* -- d
pens/ito -- to weigh out, pay, are taxable, to weigh, ponder, consider, after often considering
pens/ura -- a weighing
penatis -- sing. de penates
penn/ata -- winged creatures, birds, Comp.
penitus -- inward, inner, interior, Comp., Sup., subst. -- furnished with, having a tail
pend/ulus* -- hanging, hanging down, pendent, doubtful, uncertain, hesitating
pens/ilis -- hanging, pendent, pensile, cushions of down, hung up to &lt;*&gt;, on arches
penelops -- a kind of duck, also called
penet/ral -- Macr. c. penetrale ---> penetralis.
penna/tus -- furnished with wings, winged
penn/esco -- to put forth feathers, wings, to become fledged
penn/ifer -- feathered, winged
penniger -- SITATING
penn/ipes -- that has wings on his feet, wing-footed
pens/atio -- a weighing, weighing out, a recompense, compensation
pens/ator -- - 1 - penseur. - 2 - celui qui pèse (ses paroles).2
pens/atus -- part. passé de penso. - 1 - dosé, pesé. - 2 - acheté, payé. - 3 - compensé, balancé. - 4 - jugé, examiné.
pent/eres -- galère à cinq rangs de rames.
pent/eris -- a ship, with five banks of oars
penetica -- die Hungerleiderkur
pensilia -- 
pen/arius -- of or for provisions, Subst. m. a storehouse, granary3
pend/eo -- to hang, hang down, be suspended, hang becomingly, shall be strung up and flogged, be exposed for sale, are held by a frail tenure, To hang in the air, be suspended, float, hover, overhang, overhangs, To hang about, loiter, tarry, linger, To hang down, be flabby, be flaccid, be weak, have no strength, to hang, rest, depend, be dependent, devoted to you, to hang, give close attention, be absorbed, gaze fixedly, To be suspended, be interrupted, To be in suspense, be uncertain, hesitate, be irresolute, be perplexed, was in doubt
pens/io -- a paying, payment, instalment, Rent, rental
pens/um -- wool weighed out to a slave for a day's spinning, allotment of wool, a charge, duty, office, Weight, consideration, scruple, importance, practise no reverence or self-control, had no scruple, they never cared at all, had they ever had regard for anything
pens/us -- P. of pendo
pendix -- pendigo
penn/or -- to put forth wings, become fledged
pens/or -- one who weighs, considers, a weigher, examiner
penula* -- ed
penita -- the inmost parts
penn/us -- pointed, sharp
penetr/alis -- piercing, penetrating, inward, inner, internal, interior, innermost, n., an inner part, interior, inside space, inner room, inner chambers, the poet's sanctum
pendiculus -- a cord, noose, snare
penetr/atio -- a piercing, penetrating
penetr/ator -- one who penetrates, a penetrator
penetr/atus -- part. passé de penetro. - 1 - Lucr. pénétré, percé; ouvert (en parl. d'un chemin). - 2 - Lucr. qui a pénétré, qui s'est introduit, qui s'est insinué.
penic/illum -- - 1 - pinceau (du peintre). - 2 - la touche, le style (de l'écrivain). - 3 - tampon de charpie. - 4 - éponge (pour essuyer).
penic/illus -- a painter's brush, hair-pencil, style
penn/atulus -- provided with wings, winged
pens/abilis -- reparable
pensitatio -- a paying, payment
pens/itator -- one who weighs, considers, a weigher, ponderer, considerer
pent/adoros -- containing five palms, hand-breadths
pent/agonon -- pentagone.
pent/agonus* -- quinquangular, pentagonal., Subst.
pent/ameter -- a pentameter
pent/asemos -- qui a cinq temps [métrique]
pent/atomon -- five-leaf, cinque-foil
pent/eloris -- having five thongs, five stripes
pent/eremis -- galère à cinq rames.
pent/orobon -- a plant, called also
pennirapus -- le pennirape (antagoniste du gladiateur samnite, dont il devait enlever l'aigrette).
pent/athlos -- one who practised the five exercises
penn/ipotens -- able to fly, winged
pens/iuncula -- a small payment
pent/aeteris -- espace de cinq ans, période cinq ans.
pent/anummus -- a silver coin of the value of five asses
pent/aprotia -- the first five men, a board, college of five superior officers
pent/agonius* -- 
pent/aptotos -- fünf Kasus habend
penetr/ale -- innermost parts/chambers/self (pl.); spirit, life of soul; gimlet (Latham);
penat/icus -- Inscr. relatif aux vivres.
penat/iger -- carrying the household gods
penn/arium -- a receptacle for pens, a pen-box
pens/iculo -- to weigh, ponder, consider
pen/uarius -- of or for provisions3
peniculus -- a sponge
pend/o -- to suspend, weigh, weigh out, To weigh out in payment, pay, pay out, to pay, suffer, undergo, To weigh, ponder, consider, deliberate upon, decide, To value, esteem, regard, esteem lightly, care nothing for, to weigh, be heavy
penn/a -- a feather, plume, a wing, A feather, with a happy omen from the flight of birds, collect., the wings
pens/o -- to weigh, weigh out, judged by the same standard, To counterbalance, contrast, compare, To compensate, recompense, requite, To pay, atone for, To weigh, ponder, examine, consider
pen/us -- a store of food, provision, victuals -- provisions, food; stock of a household; storeroom in temple of Vesta; -- -I. Store or provision of food provisions, victuals -II. The innermost part of a temple of Vesta, the sanctuary3
pen/is -- a tail (old), The penis, Lust, wantonness, dissipation4
pen/sa -- a day's provisions, a ration for a day3
pen/um -- 1 - c. penus. 2 - Lampr. sanctuaire du temple de Vesta.4
penetr/abilis -- penetrable, vulnerable, Piercing, penetrating
pens/iculator -- a weigher, examiner
pent/aphyllon -- five-leaved grass, cinque-foil
pent/aspaston -- a tackle with five pulleys
pent/achordos -- fünfsaitig
pent/astichos -- fünf Säulenreihen habend
penthemimericus -- 
pent/adactylos -- pentadactyle [coquillage] / c. pentaphyllon
pentasphaerum* -- Dig. une plante aromatique.
pent/asyllabos -- qui est de cinq syllabes
pent/hemimeres -- a part of a verse, consisting of its first two feet and a half, a penthemimeris
pent/adactylon -- quintefeuille ou potentille (plante).
pent/asphaerus -- a kind of costly spice
peniculamentum -- A tail, train
__petro*
A rustic
petroselinum -- rock-parsley
petrosa -- rocky places>
petrosus -- full of rocks, rocky, Subst.>
petrotos -- stony, petrified>
petrobolus* -- lancé comme un projectile, projectile
petrocarpos -- herbe qui pousse au milieu des pierres
petronius -- rock-, crag-, mountain- canis>
petroselinon -- rock-parsley
__phallou*
phallouitrobolum -- a drinking-vessel shaped like a phallus
phallouitrobolus* -- a drinking-vessel shaped like a phallus
phallouitrobulum* -- 
__pharma
pharmaceuticus -- of or belonging to drugs, pharmaceutical
pharmacopola -- a drugseller, quack
pharmacus -- a poisoner, a sorcerer
pharmacum -- drogue (médicament ou poison).
pharmaceutria -- a sorceress, in lemm
__phil
philargicus -- fond of ease
philyra -- the lindentree
philema -- a kiss
philura -- the linden-tree
philitia -- the public meals of the Lacedaemonians
philtrum -- a love-potion, philter
philippi -- philippes (pièces d'or à l'effigie de Philippe).
philus -- beloved
philocalus -- Pelag. propret, élégant.
philosopha -- a female philosopher
philyrinus -- made of the inner bark of the linden-tree
philocalia -- a love of the beautiful
philologus* -- scholarly, learned
philosophus -- philosophical; -- philosophical
philargyria -- the love of money, avarice
philetaeria -- Plin. valériane grecque (plante).
philosophor -- to study philosophy, philosophize
philetaeris -- a plant, called also
philopaes -- a plant
philippei -- philippes, monnaie [d'or] à l'effigie de Philippe
philosarx -- qui tient à la chair
philtrodotes -- A plant, called also
philosophiae -- 
philosophumenos -- philosophical
philanthropia -- a benevolence, a present, gift
philanthropos -- goose-grass, clivers
philanthropion -- Ulp. don d'amitié.
philosophaster -- a bad philosopher, a philosophaster
__philo*
philograecus -- fond of Greek;, subst., a lover of the Greek language
philologia -- love of study, literary culture
philopygista -- an abandoned person?
philosarca -- a lover of the flesh
philosophia -- philosophy, love of wisdom;
philosophicus -- of or belonging to philosophy, philosophic, Adv.
philostorgus -- loving tenderly, affectionate?
philotechnus -- fond of the arts, relating to the, study of the arts, philotechnic
philocalus -- Pelag. propret, élégant.
philosopha -- a female philosopher
philocalia -- a love of the beautiful
philologus* -- scholarly, learned
philosophus -- philosophical; -- philosophical
philosophor -- to study philosophy, philosophize
philopaes -- a plant#
philosarx -- qui tient à la chair
philosophiae -- 
philosophumenos -- philosophical
philosophaster -- a bad philosopher, a philosophaster
__phoenic
phoenic/opterus -- the flamingo, red-wing (of water-bird)
phoenicium -- Isid. sorte d'instrument à cordes (inventé par les Phéniciens).
phoeniceus -- purple-red, scarlet
phoenicinus* -- de palmier
phoenicites -- vin de dattes
phoenicitis -- a precious stone
phoenicurus -- a bird, the redtail, redstart
phoenicea -- a kind of barley, mouse-barley
phoeniciatus* -- c. phoenicatus
__phyl
phyl/archus -- a tribal chief, emir
phylaca -- a prison
phyllon -- a plant, called also
phylacista -- a jailer;, of a creditor who duns for his money, and makes a prisoner of the debtor by keeping a watch on his house
phylacterium -- an amulet
__physio*
physiognomicus -- Fulg. physiognomonique.
physiologa -- Physiology
physiologumena -- recherches sur l'histoire naturelle
physiologia* -- knowledge of nature, natural philosophy
physiologus* -- of or belonging to physiology, physiological;
physiognomon -- a discerner of character, physiognomist
physiologicus -- of or belonging to physiology, physiological, Adv.
__pili*
pilicrepus -- a ballplayer
pililudius -- c. pilarius
__pinaco*
pinacotheca -- a picture-gallery
pinacothece -- a picture-gallery
__pisci
piscicapus -- a fish-catcher, fisher
piscinilla -- petit vivier, petit bassin>
piscinula -- petit vivier, petit bassin.>
piscina -- a fish-pond, the public fish-pond>
piscinalis -- of or belonging to a bath>
pisciculus -- a little fish>
piscinarius -- a cultivator of fish, keeper of fish-ponds>
piscinensis -- of or belonging to fish-ponds>
pisciceps -- [inus.]
pisciunculus -- tout petit poisson>
__plectri*
plectricanus -- qui résonne sous le plectre.
plectrifer -- carrying the plectrum
plectriger -- das Plektrum führend, mit dem Plektrum - ( in der Hand
plectripotens -- master of, skilful with the plectrum, great in lyric poetry
__plum
plumatile -- an embroidered garment>
plumbatura -- a soldering with lead
plumbosus -- full of lead, having much lead mixed with it, Sup.>
plumbum -- lead, tin, a leaden ball, moulded bullet, the pipe, a pencil?
plumula -- a little downfeather, a little feather2>
plumbea -- a leaden ball>
plumeus -- downy, filled with down2>
plumbeus -- of lead, leaden, Leaden, blunt, dull, Leaden, heavy, oppressive, burdensome, leaden, dull, stupid, stolid>
plumalis -- feathered2?
plumatus* -- covered with feathers, feathered2>
plumbago -- A species of lead ore, black-lead, plumbago, also called>
plumbeum -- vase de plomb.>
plumella -- a small feather2>
plumesco -- to begin to have, get feathers, to become fledged2>
plumi/ger -- feather-bearing, feathered2
plumi/pes -- feather-footed, with feathered feet2
plumosus -- downy, feathered2
plumator -- >
plumbo -- To lead, to solder with lead>
plumatilis -- brodé.2>
plumbarius -- of or belonging to lead, lead-; Subst. m. a plumber>
plumbarium -- a place to keep leaden vessels in>
plumacium -- a feather pillow, down pillow2>
plumbatae -- balles de plomb.2>
plumbatus -- leaden>
plumarius -- of or belonging to soft feathers;, embroidered with feathers -- an embroiderer2>
__plumi
plumipeda -- der an den Füßen Gefiederte
plumiger -- feather-bearing, feathered
plumipes -- feather-footed, with feathered feet
__pluri*
plurilaterus -- having several sides
plurimus -- most, very much, very many, in great mass, very great, most oppressive, thickest, severe, Collect., many a one, my best love to, n., as much as possible, esteemed above all
pluriuocus -- having several, many significations
plurifarius -- varié, multiple.>
pluriformis -- having many forms, manifold, varied
__poly*
polyanthemum -- a caustic plant, otherwise called, many-flowered, crowfoot
polygala -- the herb milkwort#
polygonius -- having many angles, polygonal
polyptycha -- accountbooks, registers
polypus -- a polypus, sea polypus, A tumor in the nose, polypus#
polymita -- damask#
polytrix -- capillaire [plante]#
polycarpos -- a plant, also called#
polycnemon -- a plant#
polyneuron -- a plant, great plantain#
polyphagus -- a glutton, gormandizer
polypodion -- a kind of fern, polypody#
polyptoton -- a figure of speech, when several cases of the same word stand together
polyrrizos -- adj., qui a beaucoup de racines / subst. n., nom d'une plante inconnue
polysarcia -- excès d'embonpoint
polyarcyon -- a kind of soothing ointment
polygonium* -- a plant, knotgrass -- polygone
polyo/nymos -- qui a plusieurs noms -- a plant, parietary
polyandrion -- a common burial-place, graveyard, cemetery
polyarchion -- a kind of soothing ointment
polygonaton -- The plant called Solomon's seal#
polygonatos -- renouée / leucacantha
polygrammos -- a sort of jasper, with many white streaks
polypsephus -- qui contient beaucoup de pierreries
polyrrhizos -- Having many roots
polyspaston -- a hoisting-tackle with many pulleys
polytrichon -- The herb golden-hair, Venus's-hair
polytrophos -- adj., très nourrissant, très nutritif
polypleurus* -- qui a beaucoup de côtés
polyrrhizon -- a plant
polytrichos -- sorte de pierre précieuse inconnue#
polygamia* -- polygamie.
polygonos -- v. polygonus.
polygonum* -- a polygon, med.
polymitus -- wrought with many treads
polymyxos -- f., having many wicks
polyposus -- having a polypus in the nose
polysemus* -- having many significations
polysigma -- a too frequent repetition of the letter
polythrix -- capillaire [plante]
polyzonos -- a kind of black precious stone with many stripes
polyacanthos -- a kind of thistle
polychronius -- long-lived, med.
polygonoides -- a species of the plant
polymitarius -- of damask, highly wrought, finished, subst. m. a damask-weaver
polysyllabus* -- qui est polysyllabe
polyanthemus -- renoncule [plante]
polychrestos -- polychreste [t. de méd.]
polysyntheton -- répétion de la conj. et
__primi*
primigenius -- first born; original, primitive; serving as root for derivatives (gram.);
primipara -- she that has brought forth, foaled, whelped, littered, for the first time;
primipilus -- the first centurion of the triarii, promote to be?
primipilatus -- the office of chief centurion of the, the primipilate?
primiscriniatus -- charge de primiscrinius.?
primitiuus -- early; first formed;>
primigenus* -- first of all, original
primipilum -- the office of chief centurion of the
primigenia -- the first principle, nature
primicerius -- the first, a chief, head, superintendent, the chancellor, chief of the secretaries>
primiformis -- of or belonging to the primary form, original
primipotens -- the first in power
primitiae -- the first yield, first-fruits, first-fruit of victory over, first deeds of arms>
primiciae -- the first things of their kind, firstlings.>
primipilaris -- a centurion of the first maniple of the triarii -- of or belonging to the first maniple of the, primipilar
primiuirgius -- one who carries the rod first before the king, head verger
primiceriatus -- the office of a chief
primipilarius -- the centurion of the first maniple of the
primiscrinius -- the chief of an official department, college
__primo*
primocreatus -- first-created
primogenitus -- first-born; oldest (child);
primoplastus -- the first - created
primoris -- the first, first, foremost, with the edges of the lips, lightly.&mdash;Plur. m, to the front, m, the chiefs, nobles, leaders, first men>
primores -- The front rank>
primordium -- a beginning, origin, commencement, plur, at the very beginning, at the beginning>
primoticus -- précoce.>
primotinus -- that grows first, early>
primordius -- original, subst.>
primogenita -- the right of the first-born, birthright
primordia -- origine, commencement / avènement [d'un prince] / molécules, éléments, principes>
primopilaris -- of or belonging to the first maniple of the, primipilar
primordialis -- that is first of all, original, primordial, Adv.>
primogenitalis -- the first of all as to origin, original
__pseud*
pseudenedrus -- a feigned lier-in-wait
__pseudo*
pseud/apostolus -- a false apostle
pseudoforum -- c. pseudothyrum
pseudomenos -- in logic, a false syllogism, piece of sophistry
pseudopatum -- a false floor
pseudosphex -- a false wasp
pseudomenus -- 
pseud/anchusa* -- a plant, bastard-anchusa, alkanet, oxtongue, bugloss
pseudobunion -- a plant, bastard-bunion#
pseudoflauus -- not exactly yellow, yellowish
pseudonardus -- bastard-nard
pseudothyrum -- a backdoor, secret entrance
pseudocyprus -- a plant, falsecyperus
pseudodoctor -- der Afterlehrer
pseudonedrus -- a secret lier-in-wait
pseudopastor -- a false pastor
pseudophorum -- c. pseudoforum.
pseudodictamnos -- bastard-dittany
pseudodictamnum -- dictame bâtard
pseudoepiscopus -- a false bishop
pseudoprophetia -- a false prophecy
pseudoprophetis -- a false prophetess
pseudosmaragdus -- a false emerald
pseudozmaragdus -- v. pseudosmaragdus.
pseudopresbyter -- faux prêtre
pseudoprophetes -- der falsche Prophet
pseud/isodomos -- a disproportionate building
pseudocypirus -- sorte de souchet [plante]
pseudographus* -- having a false superscription, title
pseudoselinum* -- a plant, bastard-selinum
pseudosynodus -- faux concile, faux synode
pseudourbanus -- imitating the fashion of towns
pseudocalidus -- qui a l'apparence d'être chaud
pseudocyperos -- sorte de souchet [plante]
pseudographia -- fausse représentation (description)
pseudoselinon -- quintefeuille [plante]
pseudosericus -- qui imite la soie
pseudodiaconus -- a false deacon
pseudodipteros -- that appears to have two rows of columns, pseudodipteral
pseudoliquidus* -- apparently liquid
pseudomonachus -- faux moine
pseudopropheta -- a false prophet
pseudosacerdos -- der Afterpriester
pseudobaptizatus -- qui n'est pas véritablement baptisé
pseudoperipterus -- qui semble être périptère [entouré de colonnes]
pseudoperipteros -- that seems to have columns all round
pseudopropheticus -- prophesying falsely, pseudo-prophetic
pseudocomitatenses -- faux comitatenses
__pseudo*
pseudoanchusa -- a plant, bastard-anchusa, alkanet, oxtongue, bugloss
pseudoapostolus -- v. pseudapostolus.
pseudoforum -- c. pseudothyrum
pseudomenos -- in logic, a false syllogism, piece of sophistry
pseudopatum -- a false floor
pseudosphex -- a false wasp
pseudomenus -- 
pseudobunion -- a plant, bastard-bunion
pseudoflauus -- not exactly yellow, yellowish
pseudonardus -- bastard-nard
pseudothyrum -- a backdoor, secret entrance
pseudocyprus -- a plant, falsecyperus
pseudodoctor -- der Afterlehrer
pseudonedrus -- a secret lier-in-wait
pseudopastor -- a false pastor
pseudophorum -- c. pseudoforum.
pseudodictamnos -- bastard-dittany
pseudodictamnum -- dictame bâtard
pseudoepiscopus -- a false bishop
pseudoprophetia -- a false prophecy
pseudoprophetis -- a false prophetess
pseudosmaragdus -- a false emerald
pseudozmaragdus -- v. pseudosmaragdus.
pseudopresbyter -- faux prêtre
pseudoprophetes -- der falsche Prophet
pseudocypirus -- sorte de souchet [plante]
pseudographus* -- having a false superscription, title
pseudoselinum* -- a plant, bastard-selinum
pseudosynodus -- faux concile, faux synode
pseudourbanus -- imitating the fashion of towns
pseudocalidus -- qui a l'apparence d'être chaud
pseudocyperos -- sorte de souchet [plante]
pseudographia -- fausse représentation (description)
pseudoselinon -- quintefeuille [plante]
pseudosericus -- qui imite la soie
pseudodiaconus -- a false deacon
pseudodipteros -- that appears to have two rows of columns, pseudodipteral
pseudoliquidus* -- apparently liquid
pseudomonachus -- faux moine
pseudopropheta -- a false prophet
pseudosacerdos -- der Afterpriester
pseudobaptizatus -- qui n'est pas véritablement baptisé
pseudoperipterus -- qui semble être périptère [entouré de colonnes]
pseudoperipteros -- that seems to have columns all round
pseudopropheticus -- prophesying falsely, pseudo-prophetic
pseudocomitatenses -- faux comitatenses
__pueri
pueri/genus -- that begets boys
puerilis -- boyish, childish, youthful, a troop of boys, boyish, Boyish, childish, puerile, trivial, silly
pueritia -- boyhood, childhood, youth
puerinus -- youthful
pueritas -- enfance (au fig.).
puerilitas -- boyhood, childhood
puerities -- childhood
__pusill>
pusill/animus -- pusillanime
pusillus -- very little, very small, petty, insignificant, n., a very little, trifle, little, small, petty, paltry, pitiful, timidity, trifling
pusillum -- a very little, a trifle
pusillitas -- littleness, smallness
pusillulus -- very little, very small
pusill/animis -- faint - hearted, timid, pusillanimous
pusill/animitas -- faintheartedness, timidity, pusillanimity
__putre>
putre/facio -- to make rotten, cause to putrefy, rot, To make friable, soften
putredo -- rottenness, putridity
putresco -- to rot, moulder, decay
putredulus* -- corrupt, foul
putre/factio -- a rotting
putrescibilis -- Hier. putrescible.
__quadra>
a square table, dining-table, flat loaves used as plates, live as a parasite, A square bit, piece, morsel
quadragenus -- forty each
quadragesimus -- fortieth
quadrantarius -- of a quarter, of a fourth part, scaling down all debts to one fourth.&mdash;Costing a quarter of an as, costing a quadrans, a substitute for the price of the bath
quadrans -- a fourth part, quarter, the fourth part of an as, quarter as, three unciae, The smallest coin, a farthing, doit, mite
quadrantal -- A liquid measure containing eight, a quadrantal
quadrassis -- Prisc. quatre as.
quadratura -- A making square, squaring, quadrature, the squaring, quadrature of the circle
quadragesima -- the fortieth part, a fortieth
quadragessis -- quarante as
quadr/angulum* -- a quadrangle
quadr/angulus* -- qui a quatre angles, quadrangulaire, carré.
quadrantalis -- containing the fourth part
quadratarius -- of or belonging to work with the square, to the work of the stone-cutter, a stone monument, subst. m. a stonecutter
quadratus -- squared, square, quadrate, squared, in solid column -- A square, a quadrate
quadratio -- a square, quadrate
quadrator -- a stonecutter
quadratum -- a square, quadrate, quadrature
quadragenarius -- of or belonging to the number forty, consisting of forty, of forty, holding forty, a forty-inch pipe, made of a plate forty inches in width, of forty, forty years old, subst. m. a man forty years of age
quadr/angularis -- v. quadro.
quadr/angulatus -- quadrangular
quadragensumus -- The fortieth
quadragesimalis -- zum vierzigsten gehörig
__quadri*
quadriangulus -- four-cornered, quadrangular, subst.
quadrichordum -- Boet. instrument à quatre cordes.
quadrigeminus -- fourfold, four
quadrisemus -- quadrisyllabic, containing four, prosodial times
quadrisomum -- Inscr. (tombeau) qui contient quatre corps.
quadrisyllabus -- Aug. qui a quatre syllabes.
quadringentus -- >
quadribaccium -- fourbeads, four-pearls
quadrifinalis -- bordering on four places, marking four boundaries
quadrifluuium -- a flowing into four parts, in four directions
quadrilaterus* -- four-sided, quadrilateral
quadrimembris -- four-limbed, four-footed, going
quadrimestris -- of four months
quadrinoctium -- a space, period of four nights
quadriangulum* -- a quadrilateral figure, quadrangle
quadricubitus* -- 
quadripertior -- to divide into four parts, verb. fDep.
quadrisextium -- pour quadrupex sextarius
quadriga -- four horse chariot (sg. or pl.); chariot team of four horses; any team;>
quadriduum -- a period of four days, four days after
quadriuium -- a place where four ways meet, cross-way, cross-road
quadriceps -- Aug. à quatre têtes, à quatre sommets.
quadridens -- four - toothed, having four teeth
quadrieris -- a vessel having four banks of oars, a quadrireme>
quadrigula -- petit quadrige.#
quadriiugi -- a four-horse team
quadriuius -- of the cross-roads
quadrigona -- carré
quadriennium* -- a period of four years
quadribacium -- fourbeads, four-pearls
quadriduanus -- of four days, for the space of four days
quadrifarius -- fourfold>
quadrifinium -- a place where four boundaries meet
quadrifinius -- placé à la limite de quatre propriétés
quadriformis -- four-formed, quadriform
quadrilibris -- that weighs four pounds
quadripartio -- - tr. - partager en quatre.
quadrisulcus* -- divisé en quatre lobes
quadriplator -- a seizer of a fourth part, an informer for profit, A corrupt judge
quadripotens -- adj., qui a une quadruple puissance
quadrigarius -- of or belonging to a four-horse, racing, chariot, the race-horses, subst. -- one who drives a four-horse chariot in the circus, a chariot-racer
quadriiugus* -- of a team of four, drawn by four horses, m, a four-horse team
quadriremis -- with four banks of oars, quadrireme -- having four banks of oars
quadricolor -- Isid. de quatre couleurs.
quadriennis -- of four years, four years old
quadrifidus* -- fourcleft, split into four parts, into four parts>
quadrifluus -- having four streams, flowing into four parts
quadriforis -- four-doored, having four doors, four doorways, openings
quadrifrons -- four-fronted, having four foreheads, four faces
quadrigalis -- of or belonging to a team of four>
quadrigamus -- one who has married four times, a husband for the fourth time
quadrigatus -- bearing the stamp of a four-horse chariot>
quadrigonus* -- having four angles, med.
quadrigulae -- a little four-horse team>
quadriiugis -- of a team of four
quadrimanis -- fourhanded, having four hands
quadrimanus* -- quadrumane
quadrimatus* -- the age of four years>
quadrimodus -- Isid. de quatre sortes.
quadrimulus* -- of four years, four years old>
quadrisomus -- containing four bodies
quadripedus* -- going on four feet, galloping.
quadr/imus -- of four winters, four years old, when four years old
quadrigae -- a team of four, four-abreast, four-in-hand, four-horse team, with scythes fastened to the yokes, a swift car, with utmost speed, by every means in our power>
quadripes -- Masc.
quadrigularius -- of or belonging to a little fourhorse team
quadripartitio -- a division into four parts, quadripartition
quadripartitus* -- divided into four parts, fourfold, quadripartite, fourfold
quadripertitus* -- divided into four parts, consisting of four parts, fourfold, quadripartite.
quadriformitas -- état de ce qui est quadruple
quadrimenstruus -- of four months
quadrin/genarius -- of four hundred each
quadricubitalis -- 
quadringentenarius -- c. quadringenarius
quadringentesimus -- the four hundredth>
__quadru*
quadrupedus -- going on four feet, galloping.
quadruplico -- to multiply by four, make fourfold, quadruplicate, one's property>
quadrupulus -- fourfold, quadruple, Subst.>
quadrupulator -- One who multiplies by four, a quadrupler
quadrula -- a little square>
quadruus -- fourcornered, fourfold>
quadruplex -- fourfold, quadruple, Four, a fourfold amount
quadruplor -- to be an informer, cheater, trickster, chicaner#
quadruplum -- four times as much, quadruple, sentence to pay fourfold damages>
quadruplus -- fourfold, quadruple, Subst.>
quadrussis -- v. quadrassis#
quadruuium -- - 1 - carrefour. - 2 - quadrivium (réunion des quatre sciences mathématiques : arithmétique, musique, géométrie et astronomie).
quadrupedans -- going on four feet, galloping, of a horse galloping, steeds
quadruplaris -- fourfold, quadruple>
quadruplator -- a seizer of a fourth part, an informer for profit, A corrupt judge>
quadrupedius -- fourfooted, quadruped
quadruplo -- to multiply by four, make fourfold, quadruple
quadrurbs -- qui renferme quatre villes
quadrupes -- Masc. -- with four feet, on all fours, hand and foot, m, a quadruped, four-footed creature, of his steeds
quadruplicatio -- a making fourfold, quadruplication>
__quam
quamdiutinus -- lasting how long, of how long duration
quamplurimum -- very much
quamtus -- c. quantus
__quate>
quate/facio -- to shake, cause to waver, weaken
quatergeminus* -- quadruple
quaternarius -- consisting of four each, containing four, quaternary
quaternitas -- nombre de quatre
quaternatio -- nature quadruple
quaternio -- the number four, a quaternion
quaternus -- sing. du distrib. quaterni
__quinque*
quinquepartitus -- divided into five parts, fivefold, quinquepartite, Adv.
quinquefolium -- a plant, cinque-foil
quinquefolius -- Five-leaved
quinquelibris -- of five pounds weight
quinquenarius -- c. quinarius>
quinquennalis -- occurring every fifth year, quinquennial, Continuing five years, quinquennial, binding for five years
quinqueuertex -- having five summits, five-peaked
quinqueres -- a vessel having five banks of oars, a quinquereme
quinqueuir -- one of a board of five, one of five commissioners
quinquennium* -- a period of five years, five years, fifteen years
quinquegenus* -- of five kinds
quinqueiugus* -- having five summits, five-peaked
quinquepedal -- a five-foot measure, a rod five feet long, in lemm.
quinqueprimi -- the five principal men in a city, after the magistracy in the colonies and
quinqueremis -- with five banks of oars, f., a galley with five banks of oars, quinquereme
quinquertium -- the five sorts of bodily exercises for youth>
quinquennis -- of five years, five years old, celebrated every fifth year
quinquepars -- Diom. divisé en cinq parties.
quinqueplex -- fivefold>
quinqueplum -- a quintuple>
quinquertio -- athlète du pentathle.>
quinquessis -- five>
quinqueuiri -- board of five, the quinquevirs, five commissioners
quinquennia -- 
quinquemestris -- of five months, five months old
quinquepedalis -- of five feet
quinqueuiralis -- belonging to the quinquevirs
quinqueuiratus -- the office of a quinquevir, membership in a commission of five
quinquefascalis -- Inscr. gouverneur qui n'a que cinq licteurs (gouverneur d'une province impériale de rang inférieur)
quinquelibralis -- of five pounds
quinquennalitas -- the office and dignity of a quinquennal
quinquepertitus* -- in five parts, fivefold
quinqueuiralicius -- of or belonging to the quinquevirs
quinquen/nalicius -- who has been a quinquennal
__quinquen>
quinquennalia -- games celebrated every fifth year
quinquen/natus -- the age of five years
quinquenarius -- c. quinarius
quinquennalis -- occurring every fifth year, quinquennial, Continuing five years, quinquennial, binding for five years
quinqu/ennium* -- a period of five years, five years, fifteen years
quinquennis -- of five years, five years old, celebrated every fifth year
quinquennia -- 
quinquennalitas -- the office and dignity of a quinquennal
quinquennalicius -- who has been a quinquennal
__sacri>
sacrilegus -- that steals sacred things, that robs a temple, sacrilegious, m., one who robs a temple, a plunderer of shrines, Guilty of profanation, sacrilegious, impious, profane, m., an impious man, profane person, wretch, f. -- one who robs, steals from a temple, one who commits sacrilege
sacri/fer -- bearing sacred things
sacrificium -- a sacrifice
sacrilegium -- the robbing of a temple, stealing of sacred things, sacrilege, the spoil of sanctuaries, Violation of sacred things, profanation, sacrilege
sacri/fico -- to make a sacrifice, offer sacrifice, sacrifice
sacricola* -- a sacrificing priest
sacrificalis -- of sacrifices, sacrificial
sacrificatio -- a sacrificing, sacrifice
sacrificator -- a sacrificer
sacrificulus -- one who conducts sacrifices, a priest, a high-priest
sacrificatus* -- part. passé de sacrifico et de sacrificor; offert en sacrifice ou qui a sacrifié aux idoles. -- a sacrificing, sacrifice
sacrima -- new wine offered to Bacchus
sacrium -- Scythian amber
sacrificor -- to make, offer a sacrifice, to sacrifice
sacrificus -- of sacrifices, for sacrificing, sacrificial, prayerful, religious
sacrificatrix -- sacrificatrice [épith. de Vénus].
sacrificialis -- qui concerne les sacrifices.
sacrificiolus -- he who sacrifices, the priest who makes the offerings formerly made by the king
__sacro*
to set apart as sacred, consecrate, dedicate, devote, To devote, doom, declare accursed, condemn, To set apart, consecrate, devote, give, dedicate, devote, To render sacred, hallow, consecrate, declared inviolable, by laws whose violation is followed by a curse, a law under the protection of the gods, To hold sacred, worship as sacred, To render imperishable, immortalize
sacrosanctus -- consecrated with religious ceremonies, most holy, sacred, inviolable
__sapro*
saprophago -- to eat putrid meat
saprofago -- - intr. - manger des aliments corrompus.
__satis*
satisfacio -- to give satisfaction, satisfy, content
satisfactio -- an excuse, apology, plea, explanation, Reparation, amends, satisfaction
satisdo -- - intr. - donner caution (pour qqch, alicui rei, de aliqua re).
satiscaueo -- donner caution.
satisdatio -- a giving of bail, giving bonds, depositing security
satisdator -- one who gives security; a surety, bail
satisfactionalis -- making amends, apologetic
satisacceptio -- a taking of security, admitting to bail
__satyro>
satyro/graphus -- a writer of satires, a satirist
satyroma -- pièce satirique, satire.
__struthio*
autruche.
struthiocamelus -- an ostrich
struthiocamelinus -- of or belonging to an ostrich
struthioninus -- Plin. d'autruche.
__strutho*
struthocamelinus -- d'autruche.
struthopodes -- Plin. qui ont des pieds de moineaux, qui ont de petits pieds.
struthopus -- sparrow-footed, having small feet
struthocamelus* -- c. struthiocamelus.
__stulti*
stultiloquium -- silly talk, babbling, stultiloquy
stultiuidus* -- simple-sighted, that sees things in a foolish light
stultitia -- folly, foolishness, simplicity, silliness, fatuity, extravagance>
stultiloquus -- talking foolishly, babbling
stultifico -- to turn into foolishness
stultiloquentium -- langage stupide.
stultiloquentia -- silly talk, babbling, stultiloquence
__tetra*
tetradrachmum -- a silver coin of four drachmas
tetragonum -- a quadrangle, tetragon
tetragonicus -- c. tetragonalis
tetragonismus -- quadrature
tetrametrus -- a verse of four metrical feet, a tetrameter
tetrapharmacum -- A plaster composed of four ingredients, med.
tetraphori -- gens qui portent à quatre
tetrapleurus -- qui a quatre côtés
tetraptota -- words which occur in only four cases, tetraptotes
tetrapylum -- édifice tétrapyle, à quatre portes
tetrarhythmus -- formé de quatre mesures
tetrasemus -- of four syllables, quadrisyllabic
tetrastichus -- de quatre vers / de quatre rangs
tetrastrophus -- de quatre strophes
tetrastylum -- tétrastyle, galerie à quatre colonnes ou quatre rangs de colonnes
tetrasyllabus -- de quatre syllabes
tetrans -- gen. plur., med.#
tetrachordon -- med.
tetrachordos -- having four strings, notes.
tetragonalis -- à quatre angles, à quatre côtés
tetraplasius -- fourfold
tetrastichos -- containing four rows, lines.
tetrastichon -- 
tetrachmum -- a Grecian silver coin of four drachmas, four-drachma piece
tetracolon -- a period consisting of four members, med.
tetracolos -- à quatre membres [t. de métrique, de rhét.]
tetradoros -- of four palms, hand-breadths
tetragonus* -- carré, qui a quatre côtés / carré [en parl. d'un nombre]
tetrameter -- tétramètre, qui a quatre mètres [métrique]
tetrarches -- a ruler of the fourth part of the land, tetrarch, petty prince, regent
tetrarchia* -- a district governed by a tetrarch, tetrarchy
tetralix -- a plant, heath#
tetraplo -- quadrupler>
tetradeum -- le nombre quatre.
tetradium -- the number four, a quaternion, tetrad
tetradice -- a plant#
tetragnathius -- a kind of poisonous spider#
tetrastrophos -- de quatre strophes
tetragnathion -- sorte d'araignée
tetraeteris -- espace de quatre années
tetraonymus* -- qui a quatre noms
tetraphoros -- of four bearers, four bearers carrying any thing together
tetraptotos -- forme qui n'a que quatre cas
tetrastylon -- tétrastyle, galerie à quatre colonnes ou quatre rangs de colonnes
tetrastylos -- having four columns.
tetragonium* -- v. tetragonum
tetraptoton -- qui a ou qui ont quatre cas [gram.]
tetrastylus -- tétrastyle [qui a quatre colonnes ou quatre rangs de colonnes]
tetragrammatos -- composé de quatre lettres
__tintinna>
tintinnabellum -- c. tintinnabulum
tintinnabulum -- a bell, signalbell, call-bell
tintinnaculus -- tinkling, clinking, clanking, the executioners
tintinnabulatus -- belled, wearing a bell, bells
__torpe>
torpe/facio -- to benumb, make torpid
torpedo -- sluggishness, numbness, The torpedo, cramp-fish, electric ray
torpesco -- to grow stiff, be benumbed, become useless, grow torpid
__torre>
torre/facio -- to make dry by heat, to parch, torrefy, pass.
torrens -- burning, hot, inflamed, rushing, roaring, boiling, impetuous, rapid, m., a torrent, impetuous, rapid -- - a - torrent. - b - torrent, flots, impétuosité, abondance.
torresco -- to become parched, burned
__treme>
treme/facio -- to cause to shake, agitate, make tremble, quaked
tremens -- 
tremesco -- to begin to shake, tremble, quake, dread
tremendus -- to be dreaded, fearful, dreadful, frightful, formidable, terrible, tremendous
tremebundus -- trembling, quivering, shaking
treme/factio -- trembling
__tri*
tricennalia -- a festival celebrated once in thirty years, a tricennial festival
tricensimus -- the thirtieth, subst., the name of a town in, on the Rhine>
tricubitus -- de trois coudées
triennium -- three years' time, three years
trifidus -- split into three, three-cleft, three-forked
trifurcium -- any thing of a three-forked shape
trigamia -- a threefold, third marriage, trigamy
trigaranus -- von drei Kranichen begleitet
trigeminus -- born three at a birth, triplet-brothers, m, three brothers born together, of the triplet-brothers, Threefold, triple, triform, a gate at the foot of the Aventine hill
trigeranus -- accompagné de trois grues [surnom du taureau divinisé chez les Gaulois]
triglyphus -- an ornament in the frieze of the Doric order, a triglyph, med.
trigonium -- A triangle
trigonicus -- triangular, three-cornered, trigonal, med., med.
triiugus -- threefold, triple
trilaterus -- three-sided, trilateral
trilongus -- consisting of three long syllables
trimanus -- qui a trois mains
trimatus -- the age of three years
trimestria -- graines qui mûrissent trois mois après l'ensemencement
trimetrius -- containing three metres, double-feet, trimeter, subst.
trimodia -- vase qui contient trois modius ou boisseaux
trimulus -- of three years, three years old?
triparcus -- very sparing, stingy, niggardly
tripartitus -- divided, divisible into three parts, threefold, tripartite, Substt
tripatina -- mets formé de trois ingrédients
tripectorus -- having three breasts, three-breasted, triplebreasted
tripertitus -- divided into three parts, threefold, tripartite
tripictus -- written three times
triplices -- a writing-tablet with three leaves
triplicatus -- part. passé de triplico.
tripoda -- trépied (de la Pythie).
triportentum -- an extraordinary omen, portent
triptota -- nouns, that have only three cases, triptotes
triquetrum -- the trinal aspect, that in which a planet's longitude differs by one-third of a circle from the earth, s
trirhythmus -- formé de trois pieds
trisemus -- containing three syllabic times, one long and one short syllable
trisomum -- sarcophage pour trois corps
trispithamus -- haut de trois empans
tristega -- third stories, floors
trisulcus -- with three furrows, three-cleft, three-forked, trifid, triple, forked lightning
trisyllabus -- of three syllables, trisyllabic
triumuiri -- three men holding an office together, associated in public business, a board of three, three joint commissioners, a triumvirate.
triduum -- three days' time, three days
triplex -- threefold, triple, the trident, to draw up in three lines, the three Fates, the finger of the three Fates, the Furies, three clans, n., three times as much, a threefold portion, triple, m, subst, a writing-tablet with three leaves
trist/is -- sad, sorrowful, mournful, dejected, melancholy, gloomy, downcast, disconsolate, Gloomy, peevish, morose, sullen, illhumored, Stern, harsh, severe, bringing sorrow, melancholy, saddening, unhappy, sad, dismal, gloomy, n., a sad thing, pest, bane, sorrow, harsh, disagreeable, bitter, offensive, foul, Expressing sorrow, gloomy, sad, melancholy, stern, harsh
triuium -- a place where three roads meet, fork, cross-road, A frequented place, public square, public street, highway, from the mob
tridens -- with three teeth; -- with three teeth, three-tined, three-pronged, tridented, trident, m, a three-tined spear, trident
triambi -- dialogue [sur la scène] entre trois personnages
triarii -- soldiers of the third rank in battle order, the reserve, demanded extreme measures
tribaca -- pendant d'oreille (formé de trois perles).
tribula -- une herse (pour battre le blé).
tribulo -- - tr. - 1 - presser avec la herse, passer la herse, battre (le blé). - 2 - tourmenter, oppresser.
triceps -- with three heads, triple-headed, of three forms
trifaux -- having three throats, triple-throated
triplus -- threefold, triple
tripodo -- to beat the ground with the feet, to leap, jump, dance
trist/or -- to be sad, grieved, downcast>
tritura -- a rubbing, chafing, threshing
trituro -- to thresh, med.4
trixago -- a plant, called also, germander#
tribius -- c. trivius
trifida -- carrefour>
trinnio -- schnattern
triuius -- of the cross-roads, Diana, f
trieris -- with three banks of oars.&mdash;Only as -- trirème, vaisseau à trois rangs de rames / adjt, qui a trois rangs de rames>
trinoctialis -- of three nights, for the space of three nights, trinoctial
triangularis -- of or belonging to a triangle, triangular
tricameratum -- a room divided into three chambers
tricameratus -- having three chambers, Subst.
tricl/inarius -- esclave qui sert à table.
tricl/iniaria -- An eating-room, dining-room, supper-room
tricl/iniaris -- of or belonging to an eating - couch, diningroom.
trientabulum* -- land assigned in commutation of one third of a public debt
triplicarius -- soldat qui reçoit une triple solde.
triplinthius -- three bricks thick
trist/imonium -- tristesse
triticiarius -- of or relating to wheat
trium/uiralis -- of the triumvirs, triumviral, of the superintendents of prisons
trium/uiratus -- the office of a triumvir, triumvirate
triangulatio -- mise en triangle
tricensimani* -- v. tricesimani.>
trimenstruus -- c. trimestris
trias -- the number three, a triad>
triga -- A team of three horses, a chariot drawn by three horses>
tric/o -- - intr. - chicaner, chercher à ruser. - tr. - se tricare : s'attarder. -- -I. a mischiefmaker, shuffler, trickster -II. to dally, delay
trite -- the third string, tone>
tribuo -- to assign, impart, allot, bestow, confer, yield, give, to grant, give, show, pay, render, To grant, yield, give up, concede, allow, accora you the respect I claim, deferred in all things.&mdash;To ascribe, assign, attribute, multum, plurimum, magnopere, to value highly, set great store by, make much of, To divide, distribute, to bestow, spend, devote5
tribus -- a third part of the people, an hereditary division of the people, tribe, received the vote of the tribe for the aedileship, expelled from the tribe, to canvass the Grammaman tribes5
triens -- a third part, third, be heir to one third of the estate, the third part of an as, 333,333, asses, a third of a sextarius>
tripus -- a three-footed seat, tripod
tribas -- an abandoned woman#
tribon -- a threadbare cloak#
tricla -- c. trichil-#
tric/or -- to make difficul ties, trifle, dally, shuffle, play tricks
trifax -- a kind of long missile weapon#
trifer -- thricebearing, that bears fruit three times a year
trifur -- a triple thief, an arrant thief
trilix -- of three cords, triple-twilled?
trimus -- of three winters, of three years, three years old>
trinio -- the number three, a three, a trey>
trinso -- v. trisso.#
trinus -- RKED#
trisso -- to twitter#
tritor -- a rubber, grinder, chafer, a chain-rubber#
triuir -- Inscr. triumvir.
tric/ae -- perplexities, subterfuges, quirks, wiles, tricks
trigon -- a ball stuffed with hair, playing-ball -- v. trygon.#
tripes -- with three feet, three-footed -- trépied, vase à trois pieds
trist/e -- a sad thing>
triplo -- - tr. - tripler.>
tritus -- oft-trodden, beaten, frequented, common, worn, practised, expert, much used, familiar, common, commonplace, trite -- a rubbing down, wearing away#
trib/unatus -- the office of a tribune, tribuneship, the office of a military tribune, would give free scope to the tribunes of the people to embarrass
triclinium -- a couch for three persons reclining at meals, eating-couch, dinner-sofa, table-couch, An eating-room, dining-room, supperroom
trimembris -- having three sets of limbs, triple-membered
trinoctium -- three-night interval;
triangulus* -- with three corners, three-cornered, triangular, n., a triangle -- a triangle
triacontas -- the number thirty
triangulum* -- triangle.
tribrachus -- Quint. tribraque (pied composé de trois brèves).
tribrachys -- a poetical foot consisting of three short syllables, a tribrach
trib/uarius -- of a tribe, of tribes, a bribing of the tribes5
trib/ulatio -- distress, trouble, tribulation5
trib/ulosus -- full of thorns, thistles5
tricennium* -- the space of thirty years, med.
tricesimus -- the thirtieth
trichalcon -- a coin of the value of three, med.
trichalcum -- pièce de monnaie de cuivre valant trois chalci
trichaptum -- a fine, soft garment woven of hair, a hairgarment#
trichiasis -- a disease of the eyelids, when the lashes grow inside#
trichordis -- three-stringed, med.
triennalis -- de trois ans, qui dure trois ans
trientalis -- that contains a third of a foot
trierarcha -- c. trierarchus?
trieterica -- the festival of Bacchus#
trigesimus -- the thirtieth, subst.>
trigonalis -- of or belonging to the trigon
trilinguis -- triple-tongued, with three tongues
trimestris -- of three months.
trinominis -- having three names, triple-named
tripatinum -- a service of three dishes
tripedalis -- measuring three feet, three feet long
triplarius -- soldat qui reçoit une triple solde.
triplasius -- threefold, triple
tripodatio -- a solemn, measured stamping with the feet
triquetrus -- with three corners, triangular, in Sicily
trisextium -- mesure de trois setiers
trispastos -- a hoisting-tackle with three pulleys, two in the upper and one in the lower block, a trispast
trist/itudo -- sadness, sorrow, grief, melancholy, dejection
tritemoria -- Capel. tierce (t. de musique).?
triticeius -- of wheat, wheaten, wheat-4
triticinus* -- of wheat, wheaten, wheat-4
trituratio -- a threshing4
triturator -- a thresher4
triump/hans -- triumphal, belonging to a triumph
triuerbero -- Gloss. triple coquin.
trinomimis -- qui a trois noms.
triscurium -- triples bouffonneries, farces
triscurria -- bouffonneries, farces, quolibets.
trist/ifico -- tr., attrister
tribulatus -- pointed, toothed -- part. passé de tribulo.
tripontium -- endroit où il y a trois ponts.
trist/ities -- sadness, mournfulness, sorrow, grief
trib/unal -- a raised platform for the seats of magistrates, judgment-seat, tribunal, the general's tribunal, the elevation in the camp, commander's seat, A memorial, monumental mound, The occupants of a tribunal, magistrates
trib/unus -- the head of a tribe, a president, commander, representative, tribune, paymasters, quaestors' assistants, tribunes of the soldiers, military tribunes, colonels, then present with the cohorts, military tribunes with consular power, plebis or plebei, a tribune of the common people, representative of the plebeians
trib/utum -- a stated payment, contribution, tribute, A gift, present
trit/icum -- wheat;
triumph/o -- to march in triumphal procession, celebrate a triumph, triumph, to be led in triumph, be conquered, be subdued, be the subjects of a triumph, obtained as booty, to triumph, exult, be glad, rejoice exceedingly
triumuir -- one of three associates in office, a member of a board of three, one of three joint commissioners, one of three commissioners to found a colony, one of three dictators, to reconstitute the state, to distribute land, superintendents of public prisons and of the police, commissioners of a public bank, fire-wardens, two recruiting boards, each of three members, to solicit and register votive offerings, to rebuild the temples
tricenus -- 
triremis -- with three banks of oars, f., a vessel with three banks of oars, trireme -- 
tribolus* -- a thorn bush, thistle, caltrop
tribulum* -- a threshingsledge, wooden platform studded with iron teeth4
tribulus -- an instrument resting on three of its iron prongs, while a fourth projected upward, a caltrop.
trib/utio -- a distributing, distribution
trib/utor -- a giver, imparter
trichias -- a kind of sardine#
trichila -- a summer-house, pavilion, bower#
trichrus -- a tricolored gem
tric/inus* -- pauvre, chétif, maigre.
tricolor -- tricolore
tricolos -- adj., formé de trois membres, à trois membres
tricolum* -- a sentence, period consisting of three clauses
tric/osus* -- full of difficulties, perplexities, full of wiles, tricks2
tridacna -- a kind of oysters#
triennia -- a festival held every three years, triennial festival
triennis -- three years old
trifilis -- having three threads, hairs
trigamus -- a thricemarried man, one who has three wives, who has been married three times
trigonum* -- triangle.
triiugis -- drawn by three horses yoked abreast, three-horse-
triloris -- having three stripes, triple-striped
trimeter -- a line of three measures, trimeter
trimodus -- qui est de trois sortes, triple
trinepos -- a grandson in the fifth degree
trinitas -- the number three, a triad
trinodis -- having three knots, three-knotted.
tripalis -- that has, is propped up by, three stakes, pales
tripetia -- a three-legged stool
triplico* -- to multiply by three, to treble, triple, med.
tripodes* -- e mX
tripodum -- trot [du cheval].
tripsaca -- sorte d'herbe.
tripudio -- to beat the ground with the feet, leap, jump, dance exultingly
trissago -- a plant, called also, germander#
tritauia -- the mother of an, or
tritauus -- the father of an, or
tritilis -- Gloss. qu'on peut broyer.
tritomus -- a kind of sea-fish#
trittilo -- - intr. - Varr. gazouiller.#
triump/us -- - 1 - triomphe, entrée solennelle du vainqueur dans Rome. - 2 - victoire, triomphe.
triuncis -- of three
triuolum -- a threshing-sledge4
tribacca -- an ear-drop consisting of three pearls
tricolon -- période à trois membres
triental -- coupe contenant le tiers du setier
trinalis -- three
trissito -- zwitschern
tributus -- formed into tribes, marshalled by tribes -- a stated payment, a contribution, tribute
tribulis -- a fellow tribesman -- - 1 - qui est de la même tribu. - 2 - misérable, pauvre.
trigonus* -- three-cornered, triangular, trigonal. Subst. m. a soothing pill -- a kind of fish, the sting-ray
tritonis -- l'olivier [consacré à Minerve, appelée aussi Tritonia]#
tricorpor -- with three bodies, of threefold form, of Geryon
trieteris -- a period of three years; hence, a biennial festival (of Bacchus)
triformis -- in three forms, in three shapes, threefold, triple, triform, Diana, of three elements
trist/itia -- sadness, mournfulness, sorrow, grief, melancholy, gloom, dejection, Gloom, Sadness, disagreeableness, Moroseness, harshness, sternness, severity>
triump/hus -- a triumphal procession, triumph, celebration of victory by a public entrance into Rome, over the Boii, head the processions, a celebration of victory, triumph, victory
tribreuis -- c. tribrachus
trib/unale -- Inscr. c. tribunal.
tricessis -- thirty
trichinus -- slight, meagre, poor#
trichitis -- a kind of alum#
trichorum -- a room divided into three apartments
trichorus* -- divisé en trois parties
tricinium -- a song by three voices, a trio
triclinia -- a chief servant who has charge of the table
tricoccum -- a kind of#
tricornis -- having three horns, three-horned
tricurium -- grande inquiétude (triple souci).
tricuspis -- with three points, three-tined, tricuspid, the trident
triduanus -- lasting three days, of three days, continuance
trifarius -- of three sorts, ways, threefold, triple, med.
trifinium -- a place where three boundaries meet
trifinius -- où aboutissent trois limites, trois propriétés
trifolium -- threeleaved grass, trefoil
trifurcus -- having three forks, prongs, points, threeforked, three-pronged
trigarium -- - 1 - endroit où s'exerçaient les chevaux d'attelage, champ de course, manège. - 2 - ensemble de trois choses, triade.
trigemino -- to triple, treble, med.
trigemmis -- having three buds, eyes
triglitis -- a precious stone
trigonius* -- à trois angles
trihorium -- the space of three hours, three hours
trilibris -- weighing three pounds
trimensis -- qui pousse en trois mois
trimetrus* -- containing three metres, double-feet, trimeter
trimodium -- a vessel that contains three, a three-peck measure
trinarius -- c. ternarius
trineptis -- a female descendant in the fifth degree
trinomius -- qui a trois noms.
triorchis -- a plant, a kind of centaury
tripatens -- triplement ouvert, à trois ouvertures.
tripeccia -- v. tripetia.
triplaris -- threefold, triple
tripodius -- consisting of three feet, a metrical foot
tripolion -- sorte de plante
tripolium -- a plant growing on cliffs
tripondis -- qui pèse trois as.
tripudium -- a measured stamping, leaping, jumping, dancing, exultant dance, solemn dance, the excited stamping of the sacred chickens when fed
tristitas -- sadness
triticeus -- of wheat, wheaten, wheat-
triuialis -- of the cross-roads, common, vulgar, trivial
trientius -- sold for a third
trifurcum -- triple pointe
trigemini -- three brothers born at a birth
trimenium -- drei Monate - das Vierteljahr
trimestre -- v. Keil
triobolos -- eine halbe Drachme
triorches -- a kind of falcon, the buzzard
tripotens -- mächtig, sehr mächtig
tripticus -- eingerieben
triptotos -- mit nur drei Kasusendungen - ein nur drei Kasus habendes Nomen
triscelum -- 
trisulcis -- three-cleft, three-forked, threepointed; threefold, triple, folding in three parts
trigarius -- of or belonging to a triga -- one who drives a threehorse chariot
trimetros -- a trimeter
tricesimarius -- qui se fait tous les trente jours, mensuel
tricliniarcha -- maître d'hôtel.
tricliniarius -- esclave qui sert à table.
trihemitonium -- un ton et un demi-ton [trois demi-tons]
triophthalmos -- a precious stone
triplicabilis -- that can be tripled, threefold, triple
trihemitonion -- un ton et un demi-ton [trois demi-tons]
trib/utarius -- of tribute, relating to contributions, promising rich gifts
tristiculus -- somewhat sorrowful, downcast
trist/imonia -- sadness;
triump/halis -- of a triumph, triumphal, whose conquest was honored by a triumph, entered in triumph, in triumphal robes, of generals who had triumphed, the triumphal ornaments
trib/unicius -- of a tribune, tribunitial, to elect tribunes of the people, moved by the tribunes, of military tribunes, m., one who has been a tribune, an ex-tribune -- one that has been a tribune, an ex-tribune
trib/utorius -- of or concerning payment
tricenarius -- of or containing thirty
tricennalis -- of or belonging to thirty years, tricennial, plur. subst.
tricl/inaris -- de triclinium, relatif aux lits de table, relatif à la salle à manger.
tricorniger -- having three horns, points
trident/ifer -- the trident-bearer
trident/iger -- the trident-bearer
trientarius -- of or belonging to a third part, a third of one per cent., four per cent.
trierarchus* -- a captain of a trireme, trierarch
trifissilis -- cleft, cloven into three parts, threeforked
triformitas -- triplicity of shape
trifurcifer -- an arch rogue, arrant knave
trinundinum -- le trinundinum, espace de temps comprenant trois marchés.
trinundinus -- of or belonging to three weekly market-days
tripartitio -- a threefold division
tripatinium -- repas composé de trois plats
tripedaneus -- of three feet, three-foot-
triplicatio -- a tripling, trebling, triplication.
triplicitas -- triplicité, nature triple.
tripudiatio -- v. tripodatio.#
trischoenus -- containing three
triscurrium -- gross buffoonery#
trist/ificus -- making sad, saddening
triump/hator -- one who triumphs, a triumpher, conqueror, vanquisher
triump/hatus* -- part. passé de triumpho.
triump/higer -- - 1 - Drac. qui apporte le triomphe. - 2 - Ennod. porté dans le triomphe.
triuenefica -- an arrant poison-mixer, a thorough hag, witch, sorceress#
trib/unitius -- of or belonging to a tribune, tribunitial
trigonarius -- zum Dreiballspiele gehörig
tripertitio -- division en trois parties
trietericus -- of three years, i. e. (since in reckoning intervals of time both extremes were counted), biennial, of alternate years
triticarius -- Inscr. de froment. -- panetier.
tricl/iniarches -- a chief servant who has charge of the table
trident/ipotens -- ruling with the trident
triump/hatorius -- of or belonging to one who triumphs, triumphing, triumphant
trigintasexuir -- ein Sechsunddreißiger
trischematistus -- à trois formes
__tricesi
tricesimani -- soldiers of the thirtieth legion
tricesimus -- the thirtieth
tricesimarius -- qui se fait tous les trente jours, mensuel
__trio
v. triones.
triobolus -- a piece of three, a half-drachm;, a trifle
trionymus -- having three names, triple-named
triorchis -- a plant, a kind of centaury
triobolos -- eine halbe Drachme
triorches -- a kind of falcon, the buzzard
triophthalmos -- a precious stone
__tume>
tume/facio -- to cause to swell, tumefy, to inflate
tumesco -- to begin to swell, swell up, to swell up, grow excited, become enraged, that war is fermenting in secret
tumentia -- a swelling -- abcès, tumeurs
__turge>
turge/facio -- tr., faire gonfler (germer)
turgesco -- to begin to swell, swell up, swell, to swell with passion
__turi*
turibulum -- an incense-pan, incense-burner, censer
turicremus -- incense-burning, for burning incense
turificatus -- one that offers incense
turilegus -- incense-gathering
turifer -- incense-bearing, yielding incense
turinus -- d'encens>
turifico -- to burn incense, offer incense, subst.
turificatio -- offrande de l'encens
turificator -- one that offers incense, an idolater
__turpi*
turpificatus -- debased, corrupted
turpiloquium -- obscene, immodest speech
turpilucrus -- making dishonest gain
turpi/lucri/cupidus -- covetous of base, dishonest gain
turpido -- baseness>
turpiculus -- rather vile, repulsive, deformed>
turpitudo -- unsightliness, repulsiveness, foulness, deformity, baseness, shamefulness, disgrace, dishonor, infamy, turpitude, fellowship in vile practices>
turpilucris -- qui fait un gain honteux.
turpiloquus -- häßliche Worte führend
__tyranni*
tyrannicida -- a killer of a tyrant, a tyrannicide
tyrannicus -- arbitrary, despotic, tyrannical>
tyrannicidium -- the killing of a tyrant, tyrannicide
__tyranno*
tyrannopolita -- a citizen of a town ruled by a tyrant
tyrannoctonus -- D?
__uacue*
uacuefacio -- to make empty, empty, clear, free
uacuefactus -- part. passé de vacuefacio; vidé, dégarni, dépeuplé, délivré.
__uale>
uale/facio -- dire adieu.
ualetudo -- habit, state of body, state of health, health, A good condition, soundness of body, good health, healthfulness, A bad condition, ill-health, sickness, feebleness, infirmity, indisposition, health, soundness, sanity, soundness, vigor
uale/dico -- to have power, force, influence; to be powerful, effective, valid; to avail, prevail, be strong, effective
ualentia -- bodily strength, vigor, med.
ualesco -- to grow strong, gain strength
ualeria -- a kind of eagle#
ualens -- strong, stout, vigorous, powerful, thick, In health, well, healthy, hale, hearty, m, strong, powerful, mighty
ualentulus -- strong, stout
ualerianus -- un valérien [pièce de monnaie à l'effigie de Valérien]#
ualetudinarium -- a sickroom, hospital
ualetudinarius -- sickly, infirm, weak, valetudinary
__uecta>
uecta/bulum -- a carriage, vehicle
uecta/culum -- a carriage, vehicle
uectatio -- a carrying, being carried, a riding
uectator -- cavalier.
uectatus -- part. passé de vecto.
uectabilis -- that can be carried, portable
uectarius -- of or for carrying or conveying; - equus, a packhorse, draught-horse
__uena>
a blood-vessel, vein
uenabulum -- a hunting-spear
uenatrix -- a huntress
uenatura -- hunting, the chase;
uenalis -- of selling, to be sold, for sale, purchasable, venal, of a public crier, m, young slaves, Capable of being bribed, purchasable, venal2
uenatio -- hunting, the chase, venery, A hunting spectacle, hunt, battue, combat of wild beasts, That which is hunted, game
uenator -- a hunter, a huntingdog
uenatus -- hunting, the chase -- part. passé de venor.
uenans -- part. prés. de venor.2
uenalicium -- Slave-selling. Plur. young slaves.#
uenalicius -- of selling, for sale, m., a slave-dealer, n. plur., merchandise, imports and exports2
uenalitius -- of or belonging to selling, for sale.2
uenaticius -- of or belonging to hunting, the chase
uenatorius -- of a hunter, for the chase
uenatitius -- of or belonging to hunting, the chase
uenaticus -- of hunting, for hunting-, a hound
uenalitas -- the capability of being bought, venality, med.
uenatilis -- springing from a vein#
uenatiuus -- en chasse, en quête.
uenaliciarius -- of or belonging to slave-selling. Subst. m., a slave-dealer2
uenatricius -- de chasse, propre à la chasse.
__ueri*
ueriloquium -- etymology
uerifico -- tr., présenter comme vrai
ueritas -- truth, truthfulness, verity, reality, Sincerity, straightforwardness, candor, sincerity, Truth, rectitude, integrity, uprightness, Reality, life, nature, fact, Etymology>
ueritus -- P. of vereor#
ueriloquus -- speaking truly, truth-telling
ueriloquax -- v. veriloquus
uericulum* -- a small javelin#
ueridicus -- truth-telling, truthful, veracious
uericulatus -- c. veruculatus.#
uerisimilis -- vraisemblable.
ueriuerbium -- a telling the truth, veracity
ueridicentia -- truthtelling
__uermi>
uermiculosus -- full of worms, wormy
uerminor -- éprouver les douleurs de l'enfantement / donner des élancements [en parl. de la goutte]#
uermino -- dep.#
uermina -- the gripes, belly-ache, stomach-ache.#
uermiculor* -- to be full of worms, wormy, to be worm-eaten
uermiculus -- a little worm, grub
uermifluus -- swarming with worms
uerminatio -- the worms, the bots.
uerminosus -- full of worms, wormy
uermiosus -- plein de vers, véreux (fruit).#
uermiculatio -- a being worm-eaten
uermiculatus -- inlaid in waving lines, vermiculated#
uermigeratus -- qui a des vers intestinaux
__ueru>
a spit, broach
ueruculum -- a small javelin
ueruella -- Char. petite brebis.?
uerutum -- a dart, javelin
ueruina -- a small javelin
uerutus -- armed with a dart, bearing a javelin
ueruago -- to break up, to plough, for the first time after its lying fallow2
ueruex -- a wether, of blockheads?
ueruecinus* -- of a wether?
ueruactum -- fallow ground, a fallow field2
ueruecina -- chair de mouton#
ueruculatus -- furnished with a small pike
__uesti>
uestibulum -- an enclosed space before a house, fore-court, entrance-court, vestibule, An entrance, an entrance, opening, beginning
uestitus -- clothing, clothes, dress, apparel, raiment, attire, vesture, to put on mourning, to lay off mourning, covering, attire, decoration, ornament -- part. passé de vestio.
uestifex -- tailleur, couturière.*
uestitor -- A maker of clothing, tailor
uestigo -- to follow in the track of, track, trace out, track up, hunt, search, scour, to inquire into, investigate, trace, search out#
uestiarium -- A clothes-press, clothes-chest, wardrobe, Articles of clothing, clothes
uestiarius -- of or belonging to clothes. Subst. m., a clothes-dealer
uestificus -- a maker of garments, a tailor*
uestifluus -- that wears long, flowing garments*
uestigatio -- a tracing, searching after2
uestigator -- a tracker, spy, tracer, searcher2
uestiplica -- a, clothes-folder, ironer, laundress
uestispica -- she that has the care of clothing, a wardrobewoman
uestigium -- the bottom of the foot, sole, The foot, A footstep, step, footprint, foot-track, track, to set foot, one step, on the spot, without moving, instantly, forthwith, A trace, mark, track, vestige, ruins, a footprint, trace, sign, token, a point, moment, instant, instantly, at that very moment2
uesticeps -- bearded, arrived at puberty, manly, virile2
uesticula -- a little garment
uestifica -- she that makes garments, a tailoress
uestiplex -- esclave chargé de la garde-robe, valet de chambre.
uestispex -- esclave chargé de la garde-robe, valet de chambre.
uestitura -- ornements sculptés.
uestimentum -- clothing, a garment, vestment, article of clothing, dress, Bed-clothing, a rug
uestificina -- a making of garments, tailoring
uestificium -- das Kleidermachen
uestiplicus -- a clothes-folder, ironer
uestispicus -- c. vestispex.
uestigiator -- a tracker, spy, tracer, searcher2
uestigabilis -- qu'on peut scruter [fig.].2
uestimentarius -- relatif aux vêtements.
uesticontubernium -- a lying under the same coverlet, sleeping in the same bed, bed - companionship
__uice*
uicedominus -- vice-roi, lieutenant du roi
uicepraefectus -- - 1 - Inscr. vice-préfet (du prétoire, de l'Italie...). - 2 - Inscr. lieutenant d'un corps).
uicequaestura -- sous-questure, office de sous-questeur.
uicesima -- vingtième partie, le vingtième / impôt du vingtième [payé par le maître sur le prix des esclaves affranchis] / [sur des marchandises, importations et exportations] / [sur les héritages]>
uicessis -- viginti asses>
uicennis -- c. vicennalis>
uicenus -- >
uicenarius -- of or belonging to the number twenty, vicenary. Subst. m., a youth of twenty>
uicennalis -- of twenty years, every twenty years
uicensimus* -- the twentieth.>
uicesimani* -- soldiers of the twentieth legion
uicensumus -- vingtième.>
uicesimus -- the twentieth>
uicenalis -- containing the number twenty>
uicennium* -- a period of twenty years
uicensima -- vingtième partie, le vingtième / impôt du vingtième [payé par le maître sur le prix des esclaves affranchis] / [sur des marchandises, importations et exportations] / [sur les héritages]>
uicensuma -- >
uicesimanus* -- soldiers (pl.) of the twentieth legion;
uicesimatio -- a drawing by lot of every twentieth man for execution, vicesimation>
uicequaestor -- Inscr. proquesteur.
uicesimarius -- of the twentieth part, from the tax of five per cent
__uicen
uicennalia -- les Vicennales, fête célébrée après vingt ans de règne d'un empereur
uicennis -- c. vicennalis
uicenus -- 
uicenarius -- of or belonging to the number twenty, vicenary. Subst. m., a youth of twenty
uicennalis -- of twenty years, every twenty years
uicensimus* -- the twentieth.
uicensumus -- vingtième.
uicenalis -- containing the number twenty
uicennium* -- a period of twenty years
uicensima -- vingtième partie, le vingtième / impôt du vingtième [payé par le maître sur le prix des esclaves affranchis] / [sur des marchandises, importations et exportations] / [sur les héritages]
uicensuma -- 
__uni*
unisonus -- qui a le même son, de son uniforme
unisyllabus -- monosyllabe
unicolor -- of one color, uniform in color
uniiugus* -- having one yoke, fastened to a single yoke, cross-beam.
unimamma -- qui n'a qu'un sein (épith. des Amazones).
unimodus -- of one fashion, sort, simple
uniuiria -- a woman that has had only one husband, Adj.
uniuocus -- that has but one meaning, univocal
unifinis -- possessing the same termination
uniuersi -- 
unimanus* -- with a single hand, one-handed
uniceps -- one-headed
unicuba -- that has lain with but one husband
unigena* -- only-begotten, only, m, a brother, sister
uniuira -- a woman that has had only one husband, Adj.
unicus -- only, sole, single, singular, unique, Alone of its kind, singular, uncommon, unparalleled, unique>
uniola -- a plani>
unisco -- - intr. - 1 - s'unir. - 2 - être d'accord (avec qqn, cum aliquo).
unitas -- the state of being one, oneness, unity.
unitio -- union, réunion
unipes -- adj., qui n'a qu'un pied
unitus -- part. passé de unio; uni, réuni, assemblé.
unigenitus* -- only begotten; only;
unicalamus -- having a single stem, straw
unicolorus -- - 1 - monochrome. - 2 - Prud. pareil.
unicornuus -- the unicorn
unistirpis -- having only one stem, trunk
uniuiratus -- the state, condition of a woman who has married but once
uniuocatio -- homonymie
unimembris -- qui n'a qu'un membre
uniunculus -- petite perle
uniuorsus -- all together, all in one, whole, entire, collective, three days together, m, the whole body, all men, the mass, everybody, n, the whole world, universe, Relating to all, general, universal, a general engagement, n, as a whole, in general, generally
uniuersus -- all together, all in one, whole, entire, collective, three days together, m, the whole body, all men, the mass, everybody, n, the whole world, universe, Relating to all, general, universal, a general engagement, n, as a whole, in general, generally
unianimis -- v. unanimis
unicaulis -- having a single stalk
unicornis -- onehorned, having a single horn.
unicultor -- a worshipper of one God, a monotheist
uniformis -- having only one shape, uniform
unimammae -- one-breasted, Amazons.
uninomius -- of one name, bearing the same name
unipetius -- having only one stalk, med.
uniuersum -- the whole world, the universe
unioculus -- v. unoculus
uniuersalitas -- universalité.
uniuersitas -- the whole, aggregate, entirety, the whole human race, the universe.&mdash;The whole world, universe
unicornicus -- unicorne.
uniformitas -- uniformity, med., med.
uniuersalis -- of or belonging to all, the whole, universal
unicorporeus -- having one body, single-bodied, med.
__usu*
usufacio -- acquérir par usucapion.
usucapio -- TICE -- an acquisition of ownership by use, prescriptive possession, usucaption
usuuenit -- - int. - venir à usage, à expérience; arriver, se présenter.
usuarius -- of or belonging to use, usuary; Subst. m. one who uses or has the use of a thing, but no right of property in it2
usura -- a using, use, enjoyment, A use of money lent, loan, A payment for the use of money, interest, usury, to exhaust their estates in paying interest2
usualis -- That is for use, fit for use>
usurula -- Gloss. un petit intérêt.2
usurpo -- to seize for use, grasp for enjoyment, seize upon, take into use, make use of, use, employ, adopt, apply, practise, exercise, enjoy, after experience of liberty, cherish the memory of, exercise, to seize, become seized, take possession, acquire, obtain, by breaking off a twig, To seize wrongfully, usurp, trespass on, appropriated, to name, call, speak of, talk of, adopt, assume, is on everybody's tongue3
usurecipio -- to recover by usucaption property once alienated
usurpatrix -- she that assumes, takes to herself without right3
usurpatio -- a taking into use, making use, using, employment, adoption, undertaking, use3
usucaptio -- c. usucapio.3
usucaptus -- P. of usucapio3
usurarius -- That serves, is fit for use, of which one has the use, enjoyment2
usurpator -- one who uses, takes possession unlawfully, a usurper3
usurpatus -- part. passé de usurpo. - 1 - Suet. acquis, occupé, usurpé. - 2 - dont on a fait usage, usité, employé, pratiqué, mis en pratique, observé. - 3 - enlevé à l'usage.
usufructuaria -- usufruitière.3
ususfructus -- pse-burner
usureceptio -- a recovery by usucaption of property once alienated
usurpabilis -- that may be used3
usurpatiuus -- wrongly used, unusual, improper, usurpative, Adv.3
usurpatorius -- usurping, usurpatory, Adv.3
usufructuarius -- one who has the use and profit but not the property of a thing, a usufructuary -- usufructuaire
