__script=scrib
a little piece of writing, little treatise
praescriptiuncula -- vaine allégation, prétexte futile
descriptiuncula -- a short description, delineation
__suggilla
suggillatiuncula -- dérision, moquerie.
__sugilla=suggilla
sugillatiuncula -- a small livid spot
__spic=spec
circumspicientia -- consideration, deliberation
conspicientia -- the faculty of considering
perspicientia -- a full perception, clear insight
prospicientia -- foresight, forethought, precaution
despicientia -- a despising, contempt
suspicientia -- Cassian. haute estime, vénération.
__ctiuncul#
contractiuncula -- a trifling dejection, sadness
dictiuncula -- Apul. petit mot.
actiuncula -- a short judicial harangue
__honest=hon
an ornament, grace
dehonestamentum -- that which disfigures, a blemish, disgrace, dishonor
inhonestamentum -- dishonor, disgrace, shame
__nota
adnotatiuncula -- a brief annotation
annotatiuncula -- a brief annotation
__can
antecantamentum -- a prelude, overture
incantamentum -- a charm, incantation
__uen
conuentiuncula -- a small assembly
inuentiuncula -- a trifling invention
__abundan
plenty, fullness, abundance, the same as when they were rich.&mdash;Profusion, lavishness
superabundantia -- superabunaance
praeabundantia -- der Überfluß
__argu
an argument, evidence, ground, support, proof, unsupported story, accepted as a proof, A sign, mark, token, evidence, indications, plausible ground, the matter, contents, subject, theme, burden, argument, upon a theme, a plot, subjects modelled % to adduce proof, To adduce in proof, To draw a conclusion
superargumento -- - intr. - Tert. prouver en outre, ajouter dans l'argumentation.
superargumentor -- seinen Beweis darauf gründen, außerdem beweisen - Beweis führen - führen  - oben darauf hinstreuen - oben daraufhin bestreuen
praeargumentor -- d., établir des principes préalables
deargumentor -- to decide finally
__monstr
praetermonstro -- vorbeiweisen
praemonstro -- to predict, presage, prognosticate
commonstro -- to show, point out distinctly:
permonstro -- tr., montrer
promonstra -- prodiges.
submonstro -- to show privately
demonstro -- to point out, indicate, designate, show
__men
commentariolum -- a short treatise, brief commentary
commentariolus -- notebook; textbook; short treatise; brief commentary (L+S);
__ped
praepedimentum -- a hinderance, impediment
impedimentum -- a hinderance, impediment, travelling equipage, luggage, the baggage, pack-horses
expedimentum -- solution d'une difficulté / prestation, exécution
__phag
anthropophagus -- a man-eater, a cannibal
anthropophagi -- Menschenfresser
__agog
archisynagoga -- Ambr. chef de la synagogue.
archisynagogus -- the priest that was chief ruler of the synagogue
__fer
circumferentia -- a circumference
differentia -- a difference, diversity, A species
conferentia -- c. collatio.
perferentia -- a bearing, suffering; endurance
sufferentia -- a bearing, enduring, toleration, sufferance, med.
offerentia -- a presenting, offering
__flu
a flow, flood, stream, river % a flowing, fluency % to water % a flow, flood;, running water, a stream, river.
circumfluentia -- Aug. surabondance.*
confluentia -- a flowing together, conflux
diffluentia -- débordement.
profluentia -- a flowing forth, stream of words
adfluentia -- a flowing to, affluence, abundance, copiousness, extravagance
effluentia -- écoulement, effusion, épanchement.
__foss
a digging
circumfossura -- a digging round
perfossura -- a digging through
__string
to draw tight, bind tight, compress, press together, forge, To touch lightly, graze, to border on, touch, To strip off, pluck off, cut away, clip, prune, unsheathe, to bare, be drawn, to waste, consume, reduce, To touch, move, affect, injure, wound, pain
circumstringo -- - tr. - serrer tout autour, envelopper.
interstringo -- to squeeze tight
superstringo -- to bind, draw together above, over
praestringo -- to draw together, fasten up, bind fast, compress
constringo -- to bind, fetter, shackle, chain
perstringo -- to bind closely, press hard, touch closely, graze
substringo -- to bind beneath, tie up
destringo -- to strip off, remove by cutting; to strip (clothes); to scrape/rub down (w/strigil); to satirize;
obstringo -- to shut in, confine
restringo -- to bind back, bind fast, tighten
adstringo -- to tie up/down/back/on/together/tightly; to bind, grasp, tighten, fix; to form boundary; - to oblige, commit; to compress, narrow, restrict; to knit (brows); to freeze, solidify;
instringo -- to bind, fasten
__termin
a boundary-line, boundary, bound, limit, Termmus, the deity presiding over boundaries, a bound, limit, end, term, An end, term % to set bounds, mark off by boundaries, bound, limit, to bound their jurisdiction, ends in, to limit, set limits, circumscribe, bound, reach the limits of, To limit, define, determine, To set bounds, close, finish, end, terminate
circumtermino -- to bound, limit round about
contermino -- to be a borderer, to border upon;
conterminum -- limite, frontière.
distermina -- the diameter, diagonal
distermino -- to separate by a boundary, to divide, limit, part, ab
protermino -- to more forward, to widen, extend
extermino -- to drive out, drive away, expel, exile, banish, to drive out, put away, put aside, remove
exterminium -- a driving away, expulsion
amtermini -- limitrophes.#
attermino -- to set bounds to, to measure, limit
determino -- to enclose, bound, limit, prescribe
__uers
a conversion, funding, borrowing to pay a debt, is to be paid by a new loan, will pay by borrowing, keep increasing your difficulties, A borrowing, loan
circumuersura -- duperie??
interuersura -- a bending, turning
inuersura -- a turn, curve
__iect=iaci
deiectiuncula -- a slight purging
eiectiuncula -- M.-Emp. légère luxation.??
__temper
moderation, sobriety, discretion, self-control, temperance
distemperantia -- mauvaise répartition
intemperantia -- want of moderation, excess, extravagance, intemperance, immoderate use, Arrogance, insolence, insubordination
intemperanties -- c. intemperantia.
__tri=tero
intertrimentum -- loss by attrition, waste, loss, damage
protrimenta -- sorte de ragoût épais.#
protrimentum -- a dish composed of various ingredients hashed together, a ragout#
detrimentum -- that which is worn away, wrecks of the work-house, Wear and tear, loss, damage, detriment, losses, to cause, to suffer, The loss of a battle, defeat, overthrow
intrimentum -- that which is rubbed in, a seasoning made of ingredients rubbed in
retrimentum -- the dregs, refuse, sediment, refuse, waste
__fens=fend
offensiuncula -- a slight offence, trifling hurt, A slight repulse, trifling disappointment
defensiuncula -- eine Art Verteidigung
__cis=caed
praecisamentum -- raie [sur une étoffe], bariolage
recisamentum -- that which is cut off, a paring, shaving, chip, bit
__strang
to throttle, choke, stifle, suffocate, strangle, Fig., to torment, torture
praestrangulo -- to choke, deprive of breath
adstrangulo -- to strangle
100
destrangulo -- to choke, strangle;, to destroy
__structur=struo
a building, mode of building, construction, mines, an arrangement, order, structure
praestructura -- a foundation, preparation
destructura -- destruction
instructura -- a building in, enclosure, barrier, Plur.
__nau
praeternauigo -- to sail by, past, acc.
circumnauigo -- to sail around, circumnavigate
supernauigo -- - intr. - Gloss. naviguer sur.
transnauigo -- to sail across, over
praenauigo -- to sail along; to sail past;
subnauigo -- to sail under the lee
pernauigo -- zu Schiffe durchfahren
adnauigo -- to sail to, toward, to come to by ship.
annauigo -- to sail to, toward, to come to by ship.
innauigo -- to sail towards
renauigo -- to sail back.
__plic=plac
supplicamentum -- a public prayer, religious ceremony*
implicamentum -- an involvement, entanglement, med.#
__iace
circumiacentia -- ??
subiacentia -- the being a subject
adiacentia -- bonne disposition.
__cap
intercapedino -- unterbrechen - unterbrechend, nachlassend - unterbrochen
discapedino -- to hold the hands apart
__equi
to ride, be a horseman, practise riding, range, man&oelig;uvred, to ride, career % a stud of horses
praeterequito -- vorbei-, auf und nieder reiten
circumequito -- to ride around:
interequito -- to ride between
perequito -- to ride through, ride hither and thither, ride about; to drive about
adequito -- to ride to, gallop to, ride up:
obequito -- to ride towards, ride up to
abequito -- to ride away (once):
inequito -- to ride upon, over
__plect
to buffet, beat; to punish; % a border
circumplecto -- to encompass; to embrace; to surround, encircle; to enclose (w/wall); to cover round about;
circumplector -- to clasp, embrace, surround, encompass
praeplecto -- to to strike before*
complector -- to clasp, embrace, grasp, To grasp, clasp, seize, encircle, surround, compass, enclose, to include, plough around, grapple, to seize upon, enfold, To grasp mentally, comprehend, understand, to consider, To comprise, express, describe, represent, explain, include, sum up, comprehend, sum up in the motion itself, summed up her wishes in, to draw a conclusion, make an inference, To embrace, value, honor, care for, have extended to.&mdash;To embrace, include, To seize, lay hold of, take possession of
complecto -- to entwine around a person or thing
amplecto -- to surround, encircle, embrace, clasp; to esteem; to cherish; to surround, include, grasp;
amplector -- to twine around, encircle, encompass, embrace, to grasp, overshadows, to embrace, understand, comprehend, see through, to comprehend in discussion, discuss particularly, handle, treat, To sum up, treat summarily, To comprehend under a name, To embrace with love, esteem, value, honor, cling to, piques himself on, to cover, occupy
implecto -- to plait, wind, twist into, to wind, twist among, to interweave, interlace, entwine
applecto -- frapper, châtier en même temps*
__scrib
to scratch, grave, engrave, draw, inscribed, graven, To write, To write, write out, compose, draw up, produce, To draw up, draught, formulate, prepare, execute, of drawing legal instruments, to have been a party to, my signature is added, to conclude, To write, write of, describe, tell in writing, describe, who could depict, called himself, To write, communicate, say in writing, tell in a letter, to enlist, enroll, levy, recruit, draft, enrolled to be sent, enroll him in your retinue, To name in a will, appoint by testament, designate, constitute, appoint guardian by will.&mdash;To order a payment, draw a check for, draw on Nerius for ten % a public writer, official scribe, professional writer, clerk, secretary, clerk of a company
circumscribo -- to encircle, circumscribe, enclose in a ring:
contrascriba -- a countersigner, comptroller
contrascribo -- to countersign
transscribo -- to copy (from book/tablet to another); to transcribe; to transfer (enrollment); to forge;
interscribo -- to write between
superscribo -- to write upon, over, to superscribe
suprascribo -- Hier. Vitr. écrire en haut, écrire précédemment.
praescribo -- to write before, prefix in writing
postscribo -- to add in writing
conscribo -- to write together, write in a roll, enroll, enlist, levy
perscribo -- to write in full, write at length, write out
proscribo -- to make public by writing, publish, proclaim, announce
subscribo -- to write underneath, inscribe below, write down
describo -- to copy off, transcribe, write out, write down
inscribo -- to write upon, inscribe
rescribo -- to write back, write in return, reply in writing
adscribo -- to add/state in writing, to insert; to appoint; to enroll, enfranchise; to reckon, number;
exscribo -- to write out, write off, copy
__ministr
praeministro -- to attend to; to minister to;
praeministra -- a female attendant, minister
subministro -- to aid by giving, give, furnish, afford, supply
administro -- to manage, control, guide, superintend, execute, regulate, rule, direct:
administra -- a female assistant, handmaid
__mitt
to cause to go, let go, send, send off, despatch, put in possession, sends out, send under the yoke, To send word, announce, tell, report, advise, send orders, send greeting, send me word that, To send as a compliment, dedicate, inscribe, To send, yield, produce, furnish, export, To dismiss, forget, put away, end, to pass over, pass by, dismiss, omit, give over, cease, forbear, never mind what, do not, To let go, let loose, quit, release, dismiss, let me alone, have done with us, scot-free, be let out, be set at liberty, to set up in business, put a bill on the house, offer for sale, send the judges to make their verdict, enter into, drive, renounce.&mdash;To let out, put forth, send out, emit, bleed, exhaust, speaks a word, speak with freedom, showed signs of fear, To send, throw, hurl, cast, launch, cast down, cast, throw away, sprinkle, let fall, To attend, guide, escort
praetermitto -- to permit to go by, let pass, let go
circummitto -- to send around:
subtermitto -- to place underneath
intermitto -- to leave off, intermit, omit, suspend, interrupt, neglect
intromitto -- to send in, let in, admit
transmitto -- to send across, carry over, convey through, bring across, send off, despatch, transmit, let pass, To pass over, go across, cross over, cross, pass, go through, traverse, Fig., to carry over, transfer, To hand over, transmit, intrust, commit
supermitto -- to throw, pour over, upon; to put in afterwards, add
praemitto -- to send forward, despatch in advance
antemitto -- to send before, send forwards, send on
permitto -- to let pass, let go, let loose*
promitto -- to let go, put forth, let hang down, let grow*
committo -- I. To bring together, join, combine, put together, connect, unite:
submitto -- to let down, put down, lower, sink, drop, Of animals, to keep for breeding, cause to breed, To let grow, To breed, produce, To provide a substitute for, supersede, To send privately, despatch secretly, sent a secret message, Fig., to lower, make lower, reduce, moderate, To lower, let down, bring down, humble, yield, surrender
admitto -- to send to, let go, let loose, let come, admit, give access:
demitto -- to send down, let down, drop, lower, put down, let fall, sink
dimitto -- to send different ways, send out, send forth, send about, scatter, distribute
remitto -- to let go back, send back, despatch back, drive back, cause to return
immitto -- to send in, let in, throw into, admit, introduce
omitto -- to let go, let loose, let fall, let fall, desert, to lay aside, let go, give up, dismiss, neglect, disregard, let me alone, laying aside, neglect, leave unpunished, do not, would not fail, To pass over, say nothing of, omit, To leave off, give over, cease
__iect=iaci
adiectamentum -- ce qu'on ajoute à un mot, suffixe.
obiectamentum -- a reproach
eiectamentum -- refuse, jetsam.&mdash; Plur.
__uesp
aduesperascit -- al??
inuesperascit -- it becomes evening, evening is approaching
__tect=teg
architectonia -- Serv. architecture.
architectonor -- - tr. - Aug. bâtir.
__fic=fac
beneficientia -- c. beneficentia.
sufficientia -- a sufficiency*
deficientia -- the wanting, want*
efficientia -- efficient power, efficiency, influence
__ger
circum.ag.gero -- to heap up around
ad.ag.gero -- to heap up, brought down, deposited by the Nile
ex.ag.gero -- to heap, pile, load, fill
__ambul
to walk, walk about, take a walk, To go, travel, march, To traverse, go to law, to march around, strut about
circumambulo -- to walk around
superambulo -- to walk upon, over
praeambulo -- to walk before
prodambulo -- - intr. - Ter. sortir pour se promener.
perambulo -- to ramble through, go through, traverse, perambulate
200
redambulo -- to come back, return
deambulo -- to walk abroad, take a walk, promenade
obambulo -- to walk before, go around
abambulo -- - intr. - s'éloigner, se retirer.
adambulo -- to walk about, at, near a thing, dat.
coambulo -- to go with
exambulo -- - intr. - sortir en promenade.
inambulo -- to walk up and down, pace to and fro, Impers.
reambulo -- v. redambulo??
__cis=caes
circumcisura -- a cutting around
praecisura -- a cutting, cut, paring
concisura -- A dividing, distributing
excisura -- the cutting out, no.
incisura -- a cutting into, incision, incisure
__claud
to shut, close, shut up, to dam up, to shut, close, to cut off, to conceal, to end one's life, To close, end, conclude, to bring up the rear, To shut in, enclose, encompass, surround, imprison, hide, confine, To encompass, invest, besiege, blockade, To shut in, hem in, are hemmed in, To close, limit, restrict, that you be deprived of, to express in poetical form, to compose verses % to limp or halt, to be lame, to falter % - intr. - boiter. % int., boiter
circumclaudo -- to shut in
superclaudo -- to cover, close up
occlaudo -- to shut, close up.
reclaudo -- To unclose, to open, throw, lay open; to disclose, reveal
__cumul
to heap, accumulate, pile, To fill full, fill, load, pile, cover, to augment, increase, heap, amass, accumulate, To fill, overload, overwhelm, crown, complete, will by my death do a greater favor in return
circumcumulo -- to heap, pile up around
accumulo -- to heap up, increase by heaping, amass:
__flagr
to flame, blaze, burn, to be inflamed with passion, blaze, glow, be excited, be stirred, fired, To be afflicted, be vexed, suffer % a whip, scourge, lash, to servitude
circumflagro -- to blaze, scorch all around
conflagro -- to burn, be consumed, be on fire:
deflagro -- to burn down, be consumed by fire
inflagro -- to kindle
__flect
to bend, bow, curve, turn, turn round, direct, avert, weave, contorted, a bay, wheels, wind myself into a snake, is moulded, To turn, double, pass around, To turn from, avoid, turn out of, To turn, go, divert one's course, march, pass, to bend, turn, direct, sway, change, modulate, melancholy, divert, might be applied, To bend, move, persuade, influence, prevail upon, overcome, soften, appease
circumflecto -- to bend, turn about (of a charioteer):
retroflecto -- to bend, turn back
deflecto -- to bend aside, turn away, divert
inflecto -- to bend, bow, curve, turn aside
reflecto -- to bend back, turn backwards, turn about, turn away
adflecto -- to affect, move, influence (to a course of action);
offlecto -- to turn about
__lustr
a slough, bog, haunt, den of beasts, A wood, forest, wilderness, A house of ill-repute, debauchery / a purificatory sacrifice, expiatory offering, lustration, made the lustral sacrifice, at the close of the census.&mdash;A period of five years, lustrum, A period of four years % to light up, illuminate, make bright, To review, survey, observe, examine, search for thee, To go around, encircle, To go round, wander over, traverse, to make bright, purify by a propitiatory offering, purify ourselves, To review, consider % to frequent places of ill-repute % 
circumlustro -- to light all around;
conlustro -- to illuminate, brighten, enlighten:
collustrium -- a corporation that procured the lustration of the fields of a district
perlustro -- to go over, wander all through, traverse completely
illustro -- to illuminate, light up; to give glory; to embellish; to make clear, elucidate; to enlighten;
illustria -- célébrité*
colustra -- v. colostra.??
delustro -- to free one from an evil charm, spell, to disenchant*
__mural=murus
a plant, also called, and
circummurale -- enceinte de fortifications
antemurale -- a protecting wall, an outwork, breastwork
promurale -- contre-mur.
__plaud
to clap, strike, beat
circumplaudo -- to applaud all around:
superplaudo -- to clap, flap over, at
complaudo -- to applaud together
supplaudo -- to stamp
applaudo -- to strike upon, beat, clap:
explaudo -- to drive out, off by clapping;, to hiss, hoot off, explode
implaudo -- - tr. - frapper contre.
replaudo -- to strike on, against
__plumb
circumplumbo -- a., to pour in lead around
implumbo -- to solder in with lead
replumbo -- to free from lead, to unsolder
adplumbo -- to apply lead to, to solder;, part. perf.
__scind
to cut, tear, rend, force apart, split, cleave, divide, tear open, bursts open, tear up, cleave, To part, separate, divide, branches, interrupt
circumscindo -- to rend around, strip (once):
interscindo -- to tear asunder, break down, divide, interrupt
praescindo -- to cut off in front
conscindo -- to tear, rend to pieces:
perscindo -- to rend asunder, tear in pieces
proscindo -- to plough, break up
subscindo -- - tr. - fendre un peu, diviser un peu.
rescindo -- to cut off, cut loose, cut down, tear open
descindo -- to divide, marking, in singing, the pauses and measure, absol., parting, dividing into two parties
inscindo -- tr., déchirer??
__separ
to disjoin, sever, part, sunder, divide, separate, Fig., to set aside, treat apart, consider separately, distinguish, except % préposé aux clôtures
circumseparo -- to separate around
disseparo -- to part, divide
__sparg
to strew, throw here and there, cast, hurl, throw about, scatter, sprinkle, hurl, To bestrew, strew, scatter upon, To besprinkle, sprinkle, moisten, wet, flecked, freckled, To scatter, separate, disperse, divide, spread out, dissipate, to distribute, spread abroad, spread, extend, disseminate, to intersperse, interpose, keep interspersing
circumspargo -- To sprinkle, strew, scatter something around
superspargo -- - tr. - Isid. Arn. répandre sur.??
praespargo -- to scatter, strew before
conspargo -- To sprinkle, moisten, besprinkle, bespatter, strew
subspargo -- to scatter under
exspargo -- FREE??
inspargo -- to sprinkle, scatter into, upon; to sprinkle
aspargo -- spray, sprinkling/scattering; moisture in form of drops; water damage;
__sperg=sparg
c. spargo.
circumspergo -- To sprinkle, strew, scatter something around
superspergo -- - tr. - Isid. Arn. répandre sur.
praespergo -- to scatter, strew before
conspergo -- to sprinkle, moisten, besprinkle, bespatter, strew
perspergo -- to besprinkle, tinge
prospergo -- to besprinkle
respergo -- to sprinkle over, besprinkle, bestrew, To besprinkle, defile
exspergo -- to sprinkle, scatter abroad, disperse
inspergo -- to sprinkle over, scatter
aspergo -- to scatter, strew upon, sprinkle, spatter over, To sprinkle with, besprinkle, bespatter, bedew, to throw upon in addition, fasten on besides, affix, gives as a sprinkling, To defile, spot, taint, asperse, stain
__stagn
a standing water, lake, pool, pond, swamp, fen, a frog, Waters, the Hellespont, An artificial lake, pool, basin % to cover the land as a lake, become a pool, stagnate, is covered, made a pool
circumstagno -- to be poured forth all around
superstagno -- to spread out into a lake
constagno -- to cause to stand, to congeal
instagno -- to overflow
restagno -- to run over, overflow;
__uol
to fly to and fro, fly around, flit about, flutter, To fly about, flutter, float around, hover, wander, cruise, to wander about, to fly, flutter about, fly to and fro, move, To aspire, rise, be elevated, be elated
circumuolito -- to fly around:
interuolito -- to flutter around
superuolito -- to fly over often, fly about over
transuolito -- to fly through
peruolito -- to fly through, flit about
inuolito -- to fly over, float over
obuolito -- to fly, flit around, to run, rove about
aduolito -- wiederholt heranfliegen
euolito -- to fly out frequently
__agog
compaedagogius -- élevé dans le même paedagogium [école pour esclaves]
suppaedagogus -- an under-teacher
300
__particip
comparticipo -- c. comparticipor.
comparticipor -- faire part de.
__cit=caes
concitamentum -- an incentive*
incitamentum -- an incitement, inducement, incentive, stimulus, to endure*
__cresc
an increase, augmentation
concrescentia -- a condensing
decrescentia -- a decreasing, waning
excrescentia -- - a - hauteur. - b - excroissance.
__fig
- tr. - 1 - mettre en croix, crucifier. - 2 - mortifier.
con.cruci.figo -- to crucify together
re.cruci.figo -- to crucify anew
__frequent
an assembling in great numbers, concourse, multitude, crowd, throng % to visit frequently, frequent, resort to, do frequently, repeat, often resort to, keep calling, to assemble in throngs, bring together, crowd, to fill with a multitude, fill, crowd, people, stock, be peopled, to draw a crowd by proclaiming, To celebrate, keep in great numbers, observe in multitudes
confrequento -- to visit frequently, in great numbers, to frequent
perfrequento -- tr., fréquenter beaucoup
infrequentia -- a small number, thinness, scantiness
__strict=string
a compression, a mass of metal under the forge
constrictura -- a drawing together
instrictura -- Isid. action de tremper (le fer), trempe.
__tenebr
to become dark, med.
contenebrico -- c. contenebro.??
intenebrico -- couvrir de ténèbres
__lect
delectamentum -- a delight, amusement, sport
illectamentum -- means of allurement, an allurement, charm
oblectamentum -- a delight, pleasure, amusement.
__spira
a breathing-hole, vent, pore, spiracle, the lungs, a breathing space, pause, short interval, instant
inspiramentum -- an inspiration
respiramentum -- relief, comfort
aspiramentum -- souffle.
__column
a column, pillar, post, destroy the city, fall into the hands of the jailers
intercolumnium -- a space between two columns, intercolumniation
antecolumnium -- emplacement devant des colonnes
__concil
to bring together, unite, reconcile, make friendly, win over, conciliate, seeks as allies, the throne through the favor of Jupiter, To procure, purchase, obtain, acquire, win, gain, you bad bargain, to extort, to cause, bring about, procure, mediate, acquire, make, produce, To commend % a meeting, rendezvous, A collection of people, meeting, assembly, An assembly for consultation, council, a bond of union, tie
interconcilio -- to gain the favor of, conciliate
deconcilio -- to deprive of, take away
inconcilio -- to win over to one's side, to gain over artfully
__iectur=iaci
a throwing, casting
interiectura -- an insertion*
coniectura -- a conjecture, guess, induction, inference, reasonable inference, a conclusion from omens, divining, soothsaying*
coniecturo -- - tr. - Boet. conjecturer.*
proiectura -- a jutty, projecture
traiectura -- a projecting over, projection, med.
eiectura -- Boet. action de jeter dehors, avance, saillie.*
__nund=nunt
the ninth day, market-day, fair-day, weekly market, a period of three market-days, till the third market-day, sing. n., on the third market-day, A market-place, market-town, trade, traffic, sale % c. nundinae / durée du consulat dans les derniers temps de l'empire romain % - tr. - 1 - vendre. - 2 - Prud. acheter, corrompre. % to hold market, trade, traffic, chaffering, to be busy, to get by trafficking, purchase, buy % The duration of the consulship, under the emperors
internundinum -- the space of time between two#
internundinium -- the space of time between two#
denundino -- tr., faire savoir à tout le monde (publier sur le marché)
__scapul
the shoulder-blades, shoulders, have incurred a flogging
interscapulium -- l'entre-deux des épaules.
interscapulum -- l'entre-deux des épaules.
__trit=ter
intertritura -- loss by attrition, wear and tear
retrituro -- to thresh over, to thresh
__cell=coll
praecellentia -- excellence
excellentia -- superiority, excellence, perfection, pre-eminence
__cinct=cing
a swordbelt
praecinctorium -- a girdle, apron*
succinctorium -- an apron*
__nosc=gnosc
knowledge
praenoscentia -- prescience.
dinoscentia -- das Unterscheiden*
__parat=par
praeparatura -- a preparing, preparation
supparatura -- a restoration*
__pos
position, posture, situation
praepositura -- the office of a chief, overseer*
compositura -- a joining together, connection*
dispositura -- a disposition, arrangement*
__curr
to run, move quickly, hasten, with superhuman speed, runs a race, to spur a willing horse, you labor to no purpose, to go through fire, to sail, fly, hasten, move rapidly, to run, flow, roll, spread, extend, to run, flow, trip, advance, move, pass away, to run, traverse, adopt the same policy % a chariot, car, wain, wagon, A triumphal car, A warchariot, A triumph, A team of horses, span, A ship, boat, A pair of small wheels under the beam of a plough
praetercurro -- to run past, by
circumcurro -- to run round, about
subtercurro -- unter - hinlaufen
transcurro -- to run over, run across, go by, pass
intercurro -- to run between, intervene, mediate
introcurro -- to run in
supercurro -- to run over, beyond
praecurro -- to run before, hasten on before, precede
antecurro -- to run before
concurro -- to run together, assemble, flock together:
discurro -- to run different ways, run to and fro, run about, wander, roam
percurro -- to run, run along, run all the way, run through, hasten through, traverse, run over, pass over
procurro -- to run forth, rush forward, charge
succurro -- to run under, run to help, hasten to the aid of, help, aid, assist, succor
decurro -- to run down, hasten down, run, hasten
excurro -- o run out, run forth, hasten forwards
incurro -- to run into, run upon, rush at, make an attack
recurro -- to run back, hasten back, return
accurro -- to run to, hasten to:
occurro -- to run up, run to meet, go to meet, meet, fall in with, face the foe, attend, To go against, rush upon, attack, To lie in the way, meet, to meet, fall into, be involved, To obviate, meet, resist, oppose, counteract, he was resisted, To obviate, cure, relieve, remedy, To meet, answer, reply, object, To offer, present itself, suggest itself, appear, occur, be thought of, present themselves*
__gred
praetergredior -- to walk by, march by, pass by, pass
circumgredior -- to go about, surround:
introgredior -- to step in, enter
transgredior -- to step across, step over, climb over, pass over, cross, sail over, cross, to go over, desert
supergredior -- to surmount, pass over, to surpass
praegredior -- to go before, go in advance, precede, To pass by, pass
antegredior -- to go before, precede
congredior -- to come together, meet, have an interview, To meet in strife, fight, contend, engage, join battle, to strive, contend, join issue on the charges
congredio -- [arch.], c. congredior??
progredior -- to come forth, go forth, go forward, go on, advance, proceed, to proceed, advance, go on, make progress, makes no headway, go on, advanced in age
progredio -- v. progredior.??
suggredior -- to approach, attack*
disgredior -- v. digredior
degredior -- to go down, march down, descend, to alight, dismount
digredior -- to go apart, go asunder, separate, part, go away, depart, at parting, stepping aside, to go aside, deviate, depart, To digress
ingredior -- to advance, go forward, march, proceed, To go into, enter, to enter upon, engage in, begin, undertake, apply oneself to, follow, began
regredior -- to go back, turn back, return, To march back, withdraw, retreat, to return, go back
regredo -- c. regredior
regredio -- zurückgehen machen, zurückziehen
adgredior -- to go to, approach
aggredio -- act., to go to, approach, adgreditur, adgreditor, Pass.
segredior -- to withdraw, go aside
egredior -- rted??
__consul
the office of consul, consulate, consulship, as a candidate, The consul's term of office, consular year, consulate
proconsulatus -- the office of a proconsul, proconsulate
exconsulatus -- situation, dignité de l'ex-consul
__materter
a mother's sister
promatertera -- a great-grandmother's sister, great-grandaunt
abmatertera -- a great-greatgreat-aunt
admatertera -- tante au quatrième degré
__script=scrib
a writing, written characters, a clerical error. &mdash;A writing, composing, composition, composing, Something written, a writing, work, book, composition, his works, A tax paid on public pastures, collector.&mdash;A clause in a will, testamentary provision % to desire to write
proscriptura -- proscription, outlawry
400
proscripturio -- to desire to proscribe
perscriptura -- a drawing up, a writing
inscriptura -- an inscription
__mini=memin
reminiscentia -- Tert. réminiscence, ressouvenir.
reminiscentiae -- recollections, remembrances, reminiscences
__sericoblatt
sericoblatta -- a garment of purple silk
sericoblattea -- vêtement de soie couleur de pourpre
__rig=reg
to make straight, set right, bring into order, smoothed out, to improve, amend, correct, reform, restore, make up for, make the best of it % a shoe-tie, shoe-latchet % c. corrigia.
supercorrigo -- - tr. - Hier. corriger en sus.
subcorrigo -- - tr. - corriger un peu [un livre] : Eugen. praef.
recorrigo -- to mend, correct again
__frut=fru
to put forth shoots, to sprout, become bushy % - intr. - 1 - pousser des rejetons, pousser des tiges. - 2 - pousser. % to put forth shoots, sprout, become bushy
superfrutico -- to sprout forth again;
effrutico -- to put forth, produce
__lacrim
a tear % to shed tears, weep, in tears, To bewail, lament, to weep, drop, distil % to shed tears, to weep
superlacrimo -- to weep, drop upon
conlacrimo -- to weep in sympathy, lament together, T., C.&mdash;To bewail:
sublacrimo -- - intr. - Veg. être un peu larmoyant.
inlacrimo -- to weep over, sorrow for, bewail, lament, the ivory statues drop tears thereat
adlacrimo -- to shed tears thereat, weep (once):
delacrimo -- to shed tears, to weep;
illacrimor -- to weep at, over, to bewail, lament
__uentor
superuentores -- a kind of soldiers
praeuentores -- éclaireurs, soldats d'avant-garde
__uentor=ueni
aduentoria -- a banquet given on one's arrival
__uerber
to beat, strike, lash, knock, To punish by striking, lash, scourge, whip, flog, beat, drub, to attack, lash, chastise, plague, torment, harass
transuerbero -- to strike through, thrust through, pierce through, transfix
conuerbero -- to strike, beat
aduerbero -- to strike on
deuerbero -- to thrash, cudgel soundly
diuerbero -- to strike asunder, cut, cleave, divide
obuerbero -- to beat soundly, to bang
reuerbero -- to repel, cause to rebound
euerbero -- to strike violently, beat
__stant=sto
circumstantes -- to surround in a hostile manner, to beset, besiege
circumstantia -- A standing round, a surrounding
praestantia -- pre-eminence, superiority, excellence, over other creatures, in all things*
constantia -- steadiness, firmness, constancy, perseverance, discipline, agreement, harmony, symmetry, consistency, for consistency's sake, adherence to.&mdash;Firmness, steadfastness, constancy, self-possession, self-possession, placidity
substantia -- resources, wealth*
exstantia -- a standing out, prominence, projection
instantia -- an impendence, approach*
obstantia -- a standing before, against, a resistance, hinderance, obstruction*
__emphan
emphanistica -- salaire pour l'ordination des prêtres.
emphanisticum -- a duty paid by a priest for the ordination
__fect=fac
interfectorium -- a means of destruction*
confectorium -- a place where swine are slaughtered*
profectoria -- festin d'adieu??
infectorium -- a dye-house#
__ferm
to swell, rise, become loose % to cause to rise, ferment;, pass., to rise, ferment. % a means of fermentation, yeast, A fermented drink, malt liquor, beer, a provocation, put that in your pipe
praefermento -- tr., faire fermenter d'avance
confermento -- to leaven, ferment through and through
infermento -- - tr. - faire fermenter.
infermentum -- unleavened bread
__uers
transuersaria -- cross-beams
aduersarius -- opposed (to), hostile, inimical, adverse; harmful, injurious, prejudicial;
aduersaria -- an antagonist, opponent, adversary, an enemy, rival
__olescent#
adulescentia -- youth, Youth, young men
adolescentior -- to behave like an
__ulescent#
adulescentia -- youth, Youth, young men
adulescentior -- to behave like an
__uol2
will, inclination
beneuolentia -- good-will, benevolence, kindness, favor, friendship, likely to conciliate
beneuolenties -- c. benevolentia.
maleuolentia -- ill-will, dislike, hatred, malevolence
inuolentia -- unwillingness
__cing
to go around, surround, encompass, environ, gird, wreathe, crown:
circumcingo -- to surround, enclose; to lie around, be round; to surround/encircle (with); to gird about;
supercingo -- to cover over, in addition
praecingo -- to gird, encircle, enclose
discingo -- to ungird, deprive of the girdle
succingo -- to gird below, tuck up, gird, gird about, girdle
concingo -- to gird, surround completely
percingo -- c. praecingo
procingo -- to gird up, to prepare, equip
accingo -- to gird to, gird on, bind on, put on with a girdle, gird round:
incingo -- to gird, gird about, surround
recingo -- to ungird, loosen, undo
__fund
a sling % the bottom, lowest part, there is no end of giving.&mdash;A piece of land, farm, estate, a bottom, foundation, an authority, approver % to lay the bottom, make a foundation, found, begin, is founded, fastened, to found, establish, fix, confirm, well laid out
circumfundo -- to pour around:
subterfundo -- to found, establish beneath
superfundo -- to pour over, pour upon, scatter over
interfundo -- to pour between; pass., to flow between
suprafundo -- - tr. - verser dessus.
transfundo -- to pour off, transfer, turn, divert
praefundo -- to pour out before, in addition to, to add by pouring
confundo -- to pour together, mingle, mix, blend:
diffundo -- to spread by pouring, pour out, pour forth, bottled, inject, To spread, scatter, diffuse, extend, to spread, diffuse, scatter, extend, to temper, to give vent to, branches out, pours out, To cheer up, gladden, exhilarate
perfundo -- to pour over, wet, moisten, bedew, besprinkle, drench, bathe
profundo -- to pour out, pour forth, shed copiously, cause to flow
profundum -- a depth, The depths of the sea, deep sea, Neptune, a depth, abyss
suffundo -- to pour below, pour into, pour upon, overspread, suffuse, infuse
effundo -- to pour out, pour forth, shed, spread abroad, To pour out, pour forth, drive out, cast out, send forth, for Ascanius, To hurl headlong, throw down, prostrate, to pour out, spread abroad, thronged, scattered, by what way can they be forced, To bring forth, produce abundantly, To lavish, squander, waste, wasted, To empty, exhaust, discharge, to pour out, express freely, expend, vent, exhaust, To give up, let go, abandon, resign, se, to abandon oneself, give up, yield, indulge, P. pass., abandoned, given up, without reserve
infundo -- to pour in, pour upon
adfundo -- to pour into, administer:
offundo -- to pour before, pour out, surrounds.&mdash;To cover, overspread, eclipsed, to pour out upon, spread over, has filled
defundo -- to pour down, pour out
refundo -- to pour back, return, cause to flow back
__ming
to make water, to void urine
circummingo -- to urinate/make water round/over (something)
commingo -- to pollute, defile:*
permingo -- to make water upon, abuse
demingo -- - tr. - rendre en urinant.
__sist=sto
to cause to stand, place, set, set up, fix, plant, plant your foot, plant the dart in his face, to cause to be placed, will see you safe home, To place, convey, send, lead, take, conduct, bring, will be carried by me to, reflex., to betake oneself, present oneself, come, to produce, cause to appear, that Quinctius shall appear to answer Naevius, as surety for his appearance, to make good the vadimonium, keep the undertaking, appear to answer, To cause to stand, fix, establish, confirm, to stand firm, endure, To arrest, stop, check, cause to halt, gradum or pedem, will halt, if not retreat, make a stand, halt, to rest, stay, to end, put an end to, stop, cause to cease, check, allay, impers., to be checked, be endured, be remedied, posse, and no relief is possible, but, the case is hopeless, that the crisis could scarcely be met, even by union, any condition is endurable
circumsisto -- to take one's stand around, surround, stand around:
contrasisto -- - intr. - Eccl. faire opposition, être en contradiction.
intersisto -- to stand still in the middle;, to stop in the midst, to make a pause, Pass. impers.
supersisto -- to place one's self upon, over, to stand upon, over
consisto -- to stand still, stand, halt, stop, take a stand, post oneself
subsisto -- to take a stand, take position, stand still, remain standing, stop, halt
persisto -- to abide, persist
500
prosisto -- hervortreten, hervorragen
desisto -- to leave off, cease, give over, desist from
insisto -- to set foot, take a stand, stand on, step on, tread on
obsisto -- to take place before, stand in the way
resisto -- to stand back, remain standing, stand still, halt, stop, stay, stay behind, remain, continue
adsisto -- to stand by, take a stand near, attend:
exsisto -- to step out, come forth, emerge, appear, stand out, project; to arise; to come to light;
__spic=spec
to look at, see; % a point, ear, spike, carry coals to Newcastle, the pistils of crocus, saffron % to furnish with spikes, ears, part. shoot out, put forth ears, med. % an ear, spike, A bright star in the constellation Virgo % Fest. épi.
circumspicio -- to look about, cast a look around, observe, see, to exercise foresight, be cautious, take heed, To view on all sides, survey, to review, commands, To descry, get sight of, discern, to view mentally, survey, ponder, weigh, consider, are you so haughty? &mdash; To look about for, seek for
introspicio -- to look into, look at, to inspect, examine, observe attentively
superspicio -- - tr. - Sol. regarder au-delà de.
retrospicio -- to look back at
transspicio -- to look, see through, med.
praespicio -- to look at before, to regard beforehand
conspicor -- to get sight of, descry, see, perceive, obtains a view
conspicio -- to look at attentively, get sight of, descry, perceive, observe, fix eyes upon, espy, at the sight of, face towards, To look at with admiration, gaze upon, observe, contemplate, to attract attention, be conspicuous, be noticed, be distinguished, be admired, shine, be a mark for, to perceive, discern
conspicuo -- - intr. - être visible.
perspicio -- to look through, look into, look at, see through, look through, be discerned, To look closely at, view, examine, inspect, to perceive clearly, discern, mark, note, observe, prove, ascertain, contemplate, to see through
prospicio -- to look forward, look into the distance, have a view, look out, look, see, do not see well, have an extensive prospect, overlooks, To see afar, discern, descry, espy, make out, observe, To look out, watch, be on the watch, to look to beforehand, see to, exercise foresight, look out for, take care of, provide for, take precautions, To foresee, To look out for, provide, procure
prospica -- she that takes care, provides beforehand
traspicio -- - tr. - voir au travers, voir au-dehors.
despicio -- to look down upon, in the range of view, acc, to be inattentive, be off guard, to look down upon, despise, disdain, refusing, To disparage, express contempt for
despica -- Naev. celle qui méprise.
despico -- tr., plumer [de jeunes oiseaux]#
despicor -- to despise, disdain
inspicio -- to look into, look upon, inspect, consider, contemplate, examine, survey, To look at, inspect, appraise, To inspect, examine, To examine, spy out, To consult, inspect, to consider, examine, investigate, inspect
inspicium -- a looking into, inspection
inspico -- to cut in the form of an ear of corn, sharpen
respicio -- to look back, look behind, look about, see behind, look back upon, gaze at, look for, see behind them, looked back for, had already passed, to look, have regard, turn attention, regard, look to, contemplate, was centred in him, might look to, have in mind, To look at anxiously, have a care for, regard, be mindful of, consider, respect, spare yourself
suspicor -- to mistrust, suspect, To suspect, apprehend, surmise, suppose, believe, conjecture
suspicio -- to look upwards, look up at, is situated towards, to look up to, raise the thoughts to, To look up to, admire, respect, regard, esteem, honor, admirable, To look at secretly, look askance at, mistrust, suspect
suspico -- - tr. - Plaut. c. suspicor.
aspicio -- to look at, look upon, behold, look, one another, to face, not in sight of, To observe, examine, inspect, to look to, lie toward, to see the light, live, to be born, to go abroad, to observe, consider, weigh, ponder, To regard, respect, To investigate
ospicor -- c. auspicor
__uers
controuersia -- a contention, quarrel, question, dispute, controversy, debate, indisputably
controuersor -- to be at variance one with another, to dispute
controuersa -- disputed, doubtful points
__len
a softening, soothing remedy; an alleviation, mollification
delenimentum -- a blandishment, allurement, effeminate luxuries
allenimentum -- a soothing remedy
__peri
experimentum -- a proof, test, trial, experiment, Experience
experimento -- - tr. - expérimenter.
operimentum -- a covering, cover, lid, a coverlet, covering for a bed*
__fec=fac
praefectura -- the office of an overseer, overseership, superintendence, The office of governor in a province, provincial deputyship, prefecture, A city governed by a prefect, prefecture*
confectura -- a making, preparing
suffectura -- a supplying, supplement, med.
offectura -- obscurité, ténèbres*
__sent
to feel beforehand, perceive in advance, have a presentiment of, presage, divine % a being at hand, presence, presence of mind, Impression, efficacy, effect, at the present time, at the moment, just now, for the present, under present circumstances, to conceal for the time, at hand % to place before, exhibit to view, to show, present, hold out, handed, presented to % to begin to have a presentiment of
repraesento -- to make present, set in view, show, exhibit, display, manifest, represent, depict*
depraesento -- tr., payer comptant, argent comptant*
__ple
supplementum -- that which fills out, supplies, reinforcements
complementum -- that which fills up, a complement, that gives them full weight
explementum -- that which fills up.
implementum -- a filling up
replementum -- accomplissement
__clin%
acclinatorium -- accotoir [d'un lit].
reclinatorium -- the back of a couch*
__lig
a bandage
adligamentum -- c. adligatio
illigamentum -- a binding on, a band, ligament
obligamentum -- a band
__not
adnotamentum -- a remark, annotation
annotamentum -- a remark, annotation
__ama__
amasiuncula -- amante.
amasiunculus -- a fond lover
__sign
antesignanus -- a leader in battle, m. as subst., the soldiers who fought in front of the standards*
postsignani -- the soldiers who are stationed behind the standards*
praesignani -- v. postsignani.
__rati
a small reckoning, little account, A slight ground, trifling reason, A petty syllogism
aratiuncula -- a small arable field, a small estate#
oratiuncula -- a little speech, few remarks
__fic=fac
beneficentia -- kindness, practical good-will, philanthropy
maleficentia -- an evil-doing, ill-conduct, mischievousness; harm, injury
__fic=fac
beneficiarii -- soldiers exempt from common labor, a body-guard
officiarius -- serviteur, ministre (d'un magistrat), appariteur; satellite, acolyte, officier
__calc
to furnish with shoes, put on shoes, shoe % a shoe, halfboot, to become senator % to put shoes on, furnish with shoes; to shoe (horses); to put feet in something; % to tread, tread upon, trample, trodden, packed in, to trample upon, suppress, to tread, pass over, the frozen sea % a shoe, a half-boot, to become senator % v. chalcus.
circumcalco -- to tread, trample upon all around
intercalco -- - tr. - fouler aux pieds dans l'intervalle.
supercalco -- to tread, stand upon
discalceo -- - tr. - Diom. déchausser.
discalcio -- - tr. - Diom. déchausser.
decalco -- to plaster with lime, to whitewash#
excalceo -- to take off the shoes.
excalceor -- c. excalceo.
excalcio -- to take off the shoes.
recalco -- to tread again, retrace
recalceo -- tr., rechausser
__clam
to call, cry out, shout aloud, complain aloud, to call aloud, call upon, proclaim, declare, invoke, to proclaim, declare
circumclamo -- to roar around
interclamo -- to cry out between, among
praeclamo -- to call out beforehand
conclamo -- to cry out together, shout, make acclaim:
proclamo -- to call, cry out, vociferate
succlamo -- to cry out in response, shout in answer, reply clamorously
perclamo -- tr., crier fort [qqch]
declamo -- to practise public speaking, exercise in oratory, declaim
exclamo -- to call out, cry aloud, exclaim
inclamo -- to give a cry, make a call, appeal, invoke
acclamo -- to call to, shout at, exclaim:
reclamo -- to cry out against, exclaim against, contradict, protest
__clud=claud
t
circumcludo -- to shut in, enclose, surround, to surround with a rim of silver, hemmed in
intercludo -- to shut out, shut off, cut off, hinder, stop, block up, intercept, To shut off, cut off, stop, hinder, prevent, stifled, person. obj., to cut off, separate, divide, shut off, intercept, To shut in, blockade, hem in, To hinder, prevent
introcludo -- to shut up in
extracludo -- to exclude
praecludo -- to shut off, shut, close, To close, forbid access to, To shut off, hinder, stop, impede
concludo -- to shut up, close, imprison, enclose, confine, to include, compress, restrain, limit, restrict, be shut up to this, to compress, include, condense, comprise, To end, close, conclude, to end, finish, conclude, complete, the charge, to round off, to conclude, infer, make an inference, argue, demonstrate
discludo -- to keep apart, divide, shut off, held asunder, to assign, relax the pinch
600
percludo -- gänzlich ausschließen
procludo -- to shut up
excludo -- to shut out, exclude, cut off, remove, separate, To hatch, to exclude, except, remove, hinder, prevent, to render impossible
includo -- to shut up, shut in, confine, enclose, imprison, keep in, closed their ranks around, sheathe, caught, ingraft, To shut off, obstruct, hinder, stop up, To interweave, inwrought, to include, enclose, insert, embrace, comprehend, chronicle, To restrain, control, To close, end
recludo -- to unclose, open, throw open, disclose, reveal, break up, draw, disclose, to disclose, reveal, open, display, expose, to open the gate for a return
accludo -- - tr. - fermer.
occludo -- to shut up, close, To restrain, check
secludo -- to shut off, shut apart, shut up, seclude, part, banish, hides
__culc=calc
circumculco -- to tread, trample upon all around
interculco -- to tread between
praeculco -- to impress strongly, beforehand
conculco -- to tread upon, trample, to tread down, trample, abuse, despise, contemn
disculcio -- to unshoe, remove the shoe from
proculco -- to tread down, trample upon, rode down, crushed, have traversed
inculco -- to tread in, tread down, to force in, drag in, superfluous.&mdash;To force upon, impress on, inculcate, insist, intrude
deculco -- to tread down, trample upon
exculco -- to tread down, stamp firm
occulco -- to tread down, trample
__fing
to touch, handle, stroke, touch gently, To form, fashion, frame, shape, mould, model, make, statuary, To set to rights, arrange, adorn, dress, trim, to alter, change, put on, feign, makes men change countenance, to form, fashion, make, mould, give character to, compose, shape my course, compose, forms, disparage, To form by instruction, instruct, teach, train, cause to play his part, To form mentally, represent in thought, imagine, conceive, think, suppose, express, sketch out, conceive, depicting, judge, do not think it, suppose, assume, To contrive, devise, invent, feign, pretend, talk deceitfully
circumfingo -- to form around
transfingo -- tr., transformer
confingo -- to fashion, fabricate, invent, devise, feign, pretend:
diffingo -- to transform, remodel, make anew, alter
perfingo -- to form, represent
effingo -- to stroke, To wipe clean, wipe out, To form, fashion, mould, imitate, to express, represent, portray, contain the representations
adfingo -- to form as an addition, make besides, attach, affix, append:
defingo -- to disfigure, deface, muddle
infingo -- - tr. - inventer, imaginer.
refingo -- to make again, make over, construct anew
__firm
to make firm, strengthen, fortify, sustain, to fortify, strengthen, secure, confirm, assure, reinforce, make lasting, matured, To strengthen in resolution, encourage, animate, with a resolute countenance, To confirm, establish, show, prove, declare, make certain
circumfirmo -- to fasten round
confirmo -- to make firm, make strong, establish, strengthen
diffirmo -- schwächen - zerstreuen
infirmo -- to weaken, invalidate, disprove, refute, impair, annul
infirmor -- - intr. - Vulg. être malade.
adfirmo -- to strengthen.&mdash; Fig., to confirm, encourage:
offirmo -- to hold fast, persevere, be obstinate, can persist in bearing it
effirmo -- to strengthen, encourage
refirmo -- tr., réparer, établir
__fric
to rub, rub down % a kind of stones in Sicily % a powder for rubbing the teeth, tooth-powder
circumfrico -- to rub around, to scour
praefrico -- tr., frotter préalablement
confrico -- to rub vigorously:
perfrico -- to rub all over, scratch
suffrico -- to rub underneath, to rub down, rub, wipe off
adfrico -- to rub (one thing against another); to apply/communicate/impart by rubbing, to smear on;
defrico -- to rub off, rub down, rub hard
effrico -- to rub off, out
exfrico -- - tr. - frotter, enlever (en frottant).
infrico -- to rub in
refrico -- to rub again, scratch open, gall, fret, irritate
sufrico -- - tr. - frotter légèrement.
africia -- un gâteau (en usage dans les sacrifices).#
__fulc
to prop up, keep up by props, stay, support
circumfulcio -- to support, hold up around
praefulcio -- to prop up, support, make sure
confulcio -- tr., bien étayer??
perfulcio -- to prop up, to sustain, support
suffulcio -- to prop underneath, to underprop, prop up, support
offulcio -- to stop up
infulcio -- to cram in.*
refulcio -- tr., étayer
__fulg
to flash, lighten, To flash, glitter, gleam, glare, glisten, shine, to shine, glitter, be conspicuous, be illustrious % to flash, to glitter % 's
circumfulgeo -- to shine around
interfulgeo -- to shine, glitter between
superfulgeo -- to shine over, to shine forth
transfulgeo -- to shine, glitter through
praefulgeo -- to beam forth, shine greatly, glitter in front
confulgeo -- to shine, gleam; to be resplendent; to shine brightly, glitter, glisten (L+S);
suffulgeo -- to gleam, shine beneath
effulgeo -- to shine out, gleam forth, flash out
refulgeo -- to flash back, shine again, reflect light, be refulgent, glitter, glisten
adfulgeo -- to shine upon, beam, glitter, appear bright, be radiant:
infulgeo -- int., briller sur [fig.]
offulgeo -- to shine upon, appear
__iect=iaci
circumiecta -- the neighborhood, standing by*
interiecta -- ??
transiectus -- a crossing, passing over, passage
coniecto -- to infer, conjecture, guess
coniectus -- a throwing, casting, projecting, hurling, within reach, a turning, directing
coniector -- v. conjecto.
disiecto -- to hurl hither and thither, to scatter, disperse
proiecto -- to drive forth, drive out
proiectum -- a jutty, projection, projecture
subiecto -- to throw under, place beneath, throw from below, casts up
subiectum -- that which is spoken of, the foundation, subject*
traiecto -- to pierce through, med.
obiecto -- to set against, oppose, dive, to abandon, expose, endanger, To throw in the way, interpose, cause, To throw out, charge, cast up, impute, reproach with, accuse of
obiecta -- ??
iniectus -- a casting on, throwing over
iniecto -- to lay on, apply
adiecto -- - tr. - ajouter.*
deiecto -- to hurl down
reiecto -- To throw, cast back
eiecto -- to cast out, throw up
__laqu
a noose, snare, throw upon, strangled, bid go and be hanged, snares, step into a snare, a snare, gin, trap, subtleties % -I. to noose, ensnare, entangle -II. to adorn with a panelled, fretted ceiling, part., panelled, fretted
circumlaqueo -- to wind around
sublaqueo -- - tr. - Inscr. mettre un plafond à, plafonner.
ablaqueo -- to turn up the earth round a tree, trench
illaqueo -- to ensnare, take in a snare
oblaqueo -- To dig about the roots
elaqueo -- to extricate from snares, fetters; to disentangle, unfetter
__latr
service, worship
circumlatro -- to bark around
interlatro -- dazwischenbellen
collatro -- to bark, yelp fiercely at;
adlatro -- to bark at. &mdash; Fig., to rail at, revile:
700
delatro -- 1 - intr. - Gell. aboyer fort. 2 - tr. - dire en hurlant.
illatro -- to bark at
oblatro -- to bark at;, to rail, carp at
dilatro -- - intr. - Gell. aboyer fort.
elatro -- n??
__nect
to bind, tie, fasten, join, fasten together, connect, weave, clasp, to detain, imprison, bind, fetter, confine, to affix, attach, To join, fasten together, connect, interweave, contrived, devise, set to harmonious measures, quarrel
circumnecto -- to wrap, bind around, surround, envelop
internecto -- to bind together, bind up
connecto -- VILE MIXTURE??
pronecto -- to knit, spin out
subnecto -- to bind below, tie under, fasten beneath
adnecto -- to tie to, bind to, fasten on, attach, annex:
innecto -- to twist, entangle, bind up, weave in, gather together, weave
obnecto -- - tr. - 1 - lier, enlacer. - 2 - Fest. lier par un engagement, obliger, engager.
renecto -- to connect
__sene
senecta -- old age, extreme age, senility
__pend
interpendium -- equipoise, equilibrium
compendium -- gain, profit, shortness, a short way, a short cut*
compendio -- To shorten, abridge*
dispendium -- expense, cost, loss, loss of time
impendium -- money laid out, outlay, cost, charge, expense, Money paid for a loan, interest, usury
appendium -- poids attaché aux pieds des gens mis en croix
__pende
circumpendeo -- to hang around
subterpendeo -- herunterhangen
praependeo -- to hang before, hang down in front
propendeo -- to hang down, preponderate
perpendeo -- int., pendre tout au long
dependeo -- to hang from, hang on, hang down
impendeo -- to hang over, overhang
appendeo -- To hang, upon, to suspend on
__pung
to prick, puncture, To produce by pricking, make by a thrust, to prick, sting, vex, grieve, trouble, disturb, afflict, mortify, annoy, I am annoyed by
circumpungo -- to prick, puncture around
interpungo -- to place points between words, to point, punctuate
transpungo -- to prick, pierce through
compungo -- to prick severely, sting, prod, puncture:
dispungo -- to check off, to examine, revise, settle, balance
perpungo -- to pierce through and through
propungo -- to prick, puncture in front
suppungo -- - 1 --Eugen. causer des élancements. 2 - Cypr. tourmenter, vexer (au fig.).
expungo -- to take by assault, to storm, capture, reduce, subdue
appungo -- - 1 - piquer. - 2 - marquer d'un point ou d'un signe critique.
depungo -- to mark off, to designate
repungo -- to goad in turn*
__purg
to free from what is superfluous, make clean, make pure, clean, cleanse, purify, bone, cleared the ground, To clear the body, purge, purge myself of, To clear away, remove, melts away, trim, to clear from accusation, excuse, exculpate, justify, To remove, refute, repel, justify, by disproving, remove, refute, To establish, vindicate, plead, pleading in excuse, to make atonement for, expiate, purify, atone for, lustrate
circumpurgo -- to cleanse, purify around
interpurgo -- to cleanse here and there
praepurgo -- to purge, cleanse beforehand
compurgo -- to purify completely
perpurgo -- to cleanse thoroughly, purge
propurgo -- to cleanse beforehand
depurgo -- to clean out, cleanse
expurgo -- to purge, cleanse, purify
repurgium -- a cleansing again, a cleaning out
repurgo -- to clean anew, cleanse off, clear again
__rump
to break, burst, tear, rend, rive, rupture, break asunder, burst in pieces, force open, break down, pierce, cut, bursting forth, crammed to bursting, to break, split, burst, break open, rend, tear, kill with errands, wounds, the effort to shout as loud as, bursts, could have burst.&mdash;To burst through, break through, To break open, cause to break forth, burst forth, to force, make by force, must be forced, to break, violate, destroy, annul, make void, interrupt, annulled, To break in upon, interrupt, cut short, end, end delay, cut off, To break out in, give utterance to % a long double-edged sword, Thracian sword % a vine branch, runner
circumrumpo -- tr., rompre, arracher autour
interrumpo -- to break apart, break off, interrupt, break to pieces, break up
introrumpo -- to break in, enter by force
praerumpo -- to break off before, tear away in front
disrumpo -- dread*
perrumpo -- to break through, force a way through, get across
prorumpo -- to break forth, break out, rush forth, make an attack
corrumpo -- to destroy, ruin, waste
subrumpo -- to break off below;, to destroy
surrumpo -- to break off below;, to destroy
abrumpo -- to break off, break away, tear, rend, burst, sever:
irrumpo -- to invade; to break/burst/force/rush in/upon/into, penetrate; to intrude on; to interrupt;
erumpo -- N??
__saep
to surround with a hedge, hedge in, fence in, enclose, To enclose, surround, encircle, fortify, guard, shut up, to surround, enclose, encompass, get by heart, beset. &mdash;To fortify, protect, guard, strengthen, guarded % - 1 - seiche (mollusque qui secrète un liquide noirâtre). - 2 - encre.
circumsaepio -- to hedge round, fence around, encircle, enclose:
intersaepio -- to fence about, hedge in, stop up, enclose, secure
praesaepe -- an enclosure, stable, stall, fold, pen, has spent his substance on his stables, from the hives, A hut, hovel, dwelling, tavern, in drinking-shops.&mdash;A crib, table
praesaepio -- to fence in front, block up, barricade
praesaepium -- an enclosure, a stable, stall, fold, pen
praesaepia -- ??
dissaepio -- to part off, separate, divide
consaepio -- to fence round, hedge in
insaepio -- to hedge in, enclose
obsaepio -- to hedge in, fence in, close, render impassable
__sign
to set a mark upon, mark, mark out, designate, press, imprint, cut, imprint, had stained, To impress with a seal, seal, seal up, affix a seal to, to be established, imprinted, To mark with a stamp, stamp, coin, To distinguish, adorn, decorate, to point out, signify, indicate, designate, express, singled out, To distinguish, note, mark % a mark, token, sign, indication, proof % marquer d'un signe distinctif
circumsigno -- to mark around
intersignium -- espace entre deux statues.
supersigno -- tr., clore [fig.], mettre les scellés sur
praesigno -- to mark before
consigno -- to seal, sign, subscribe, set seal to
dissigno -- to unseal, disclose
persigno -- to register accurately, record
subsigno -- to mark, undersign, enter, register
designo -- to mark out, point out, trace, designate, define (often confounded with dissigno)
insigne -- a mark, indication, proof, sign, token, signal, conspicuous shield, mourning, A badge, garb, decoration, attire, uniform, costume, regalia, ornaments of the helmets, costume of a singer, coat of arms, A standard, the flag, A signal, an honor, distinction, A gem, brilliant passage, fine saying, a glorious song*
insignio -- to mark, make conspicuous, distinguish, was remarkable for
insigno -- to engrave
obsigno -- to seal, seal up, attest under seal
resigno -- to unseal, open
adsigno -- to mark out, allot, assign, award:
exsigno -- to write out, note down
__spir
a coil, fold, twist, spiral % to breathe, draw breath, respire
circumspiro -- int., souffler autour
interspiro -- to fetch breath between;, to admit air
conspiro -- to blow together, sound in unison
perspiro -- To breathe everywhere
prospiro -- to breathe forth, exhale
inspiro -- to blow upon, breathe into, inspire
suspirium -- a deep breath, sighing, sigh
suspiro -- to draw a deep breath, heave a sigh, sigh, sighing, to sigh for, long for
exspiro -- to breathe out, emit, blow out, exhale, give out
respiro -- to blow back, breathe back, breathe out, exhale
800
aspiro -- to breathe at, blow upon, freshen, exhaling, sends favorable breezes, imparts, breathing, on him, accompany, to strive for, seek to reach, aspire to, draw near, to rival, to meddle, To favor, help
__stip
to crowd together, compress, press, pack, to pack up with, To press, cram, stuff, pack, fill full, To surround, encompass, throng, environ, attend, accompany % the coarse part of flax, tow, hards, oakum
circumstipo -- to surround, accompany, attend, Absol., Pass.
constipo -- to press together, crowd closely
perstipo -- to crowd, press together
instipo -- to stuff into
__tend
to stretch, make tense, stretch out, spread out, distend, extend, keep bent, swell, spread, distended, to spread out, pitch, erect, To stretch out, present, offer, reach, extend, reaches, to tender, hold out, To aim, direct, shoot, drive, To string, tune, to lay, contrive, devise, are laid.&mdash; To press, strain, press to extravagance, protract, to direct, pursue, turn, wend, To direct oneself, hold a course, aim, strive, go, move, march, drive, tend, bend, To extend, stretch, reach, To set up tents, be under tents, be encamped, encamp, to aim, strive, be directed, be inclined, tend, tend, To be persistent, make exertion, exert oneself, strive, endeavor, contend, struggle, persists, making less opposition in the case of the praetorship, what does he strive for?
circumtendo -- tr., envelopper, entourer
supertendo -- to stretch, strain above
praetendo -- to stretch forth, reach out, extend, present
contendo -- to stretch, bend, draw tight, strain
portendo -- to point out, indicate, reveal, foretell, predict, presage, portend
protendo -- to stretch forth, stretch, reach out, extend
distendo -- to stretch asunder, stretch out, extend
pertendo -- to press on, carry out, continue
subtendo -- tr., tendre par-dessous / int., s'étendre par-dessous
obtendo -- to spread before, stretch over
retendo -- to release from tension, unbend, slacken, relax*
adtendo -- to turn/stretch towards; to apply; to attend/pay (close) attention to, to listen carefully;
detendo -- to unstretch, relax, to strike the tents
__terg
to rub off, wipe off, wipe dry, wipe clean, cleanse, polish, to tickle the palate % to rub, wipe; to wipe off, wipe dry; to clean, cleanse (sometimes tergeo); % the back, The back part, reverse, hinder part, rear, to sun itself, the flight, written on the back, behind, in the rear, behind, has passed, verto or do, to turn the back, turn back, take flight, run away, flee, retreat, The back, surface, the body, head of swine, The covering of the back, skin, hide, leather, ox-hide, in a bag of bull's hide, tymbals, the nine thicknesses of bull's hide
circumtergeo -- to wipe around
abstergeo -- to wipe off, cleanse by wiping:
pertergeo -- to wipe off, wipe dry
pertergo -- to wipe off, wipe dry.
detergeo -- to wipe off, wipe away
extergeo -- to strip clean, plunder
extergo -- to wipe out, off, to wipe dry, wipe
retergeo -- to wipe out, cleanse, clear
__torqu
to turn, turn about, turn away, twist, bend, wind, curl, spin, bend, wrapping about him, has half-finished, To whirl around, whirl, wield, brandish, fling with force, hurl, hiss, To twist awry, misplace, turn aside, distort, To wrench on the rack, put to the rack, rack, torture, to twist, wrest, distort, turn, bend, direct, To rack, torment, torture, examines, To ply, put to the test, to hurl, fling
circumtorqueo -- to twist, turn around
praetorqueo -- to twist forwards, twist round
contorqueo -- to turn, twist, twirl, swing, whirl, brandish, wield, hurl
distorqueo -- to turn awry, twist, distort
pertorqueo -- to twist awry, to distort
subtorqueo -- tr., tordre
detorqueo -- to bend aside, turn off, turn away, turn, direct
extorqueo -- to twist out, wrench out, wrest away
intorqueo -- to twist, wind about, fold, wrench, distort
retorqueo -- to twist back, turn back, throw back
abtorqueo -- - tr. - détourner.
attorqueo -- to hurl upwards
obtorqueo -- to twist, writhe, wrench.&mdash;Only P. perf.
__trah
to draw, drag, haul, train along, draw off, pull forth, drag away, pulled, to trail, to lead, draw, take along, be followed by, To draw out, pull out, extract, withdraw, drag down, To draw together, bring together, contract, wrinkle, To draw, draw up, draw in, take in, quaff, inhale, quaff, to heave sighs, To take on, assume, acquire, get, To drag away violently, carry off, plunder, To make away with, dissipate, squander, To draw out, spin, manufacture, to draw, draw along, lead on, force, attract, allure, influence, to gain over, if they divide into factions, divert, To drag, lead, bring, To draw to, appropriate, refer, ascribe, set down to, laid claim to, regarded as impious presumption, took, appropriated, To drag, distract, To weigh, ponder, consider, form a plan, To get, obtain, derive, acquire, experience, adopted, to protract, drag out, linger through, extend, prolong, lengthen, delay, retard, deliberated % a drag, sledge % a drag, sledge
circumtraho -- to draw, drag around, fin;
intertraho -- to take away, withdraw from
supertraho -- to draw over
abstraho -- to drag away, draw off, pull away, detach:
distraho -- to pull asunder, tear in pieces, part, divide
pertraho -- to draw along, drag, conduct forcibly
protraho -- to draw forth, drag out, bring forward, produce
subtraho -- to draw from below, drag out, draw off, carry off, withdraw, take away, remove
detraho -- to draw off, take down, pull down, take away, remove, withdraw, drag, bring
retraho -- to draw back, withdraw, call back
adtraho -- to attract, draw/drag together/in/before/along; to inhale; to gather saliva; to bend (bow);
obtraho -- to draw, turn towards
__tund
to beat, strike, thump, buffet, to harp on one string perpetually.&mdash;To pound, bruise, bray, to din, stun, keep at, importune
circumtundo -- tr., frapper autour
contundo -- to beat, bruise, grind, crush, pound, break to pieces
pertundo -- to thrust through, bore through, perforate
detundo -- to bruise severely; to beat (L+S);
extundo -- to beat out, strike out, forge out
intundo -- to bruise, pound
obtundo -- to blunt, weaken, exhaust, make dull
retundo -- to beat back, blunt, dull
__uall
to fortify with a rampart, surround with palisades, intrench, circumvallate, intrench themselves at night, to fortify, protect, defend % a line of palisades, palisaded rampart, intrenchment, circumvallation, a wall, rampart, fortification % a little winnowing-van
circumuallo -- to surround with a wall, circumvallate, blockade, invest, encompass:
circumuallum -- circonvallation
interuallum -- the space between palisades, an intermediate space, interval, distance
interuallo -- to take, assume at intervals
praeuallo -- to fortify in front
conuallia -- a valley enclosed on all sides;
conuallo -- to surround with an intrenchment;, to surround, encircle
obuallo -- to surround with a wall, rampart; to fortify, intrench.
euallo -- to cast out*
__uinc
to bind, bind about, fetter, tie, fasten, surround, encircle, about to encircle, To compress, lace, To compass, surround, guard, to bind, fetter, confine, restrain, attach, to bind, bury, sink, to bind, arrange, link together, arranged rhythmically, too artificial % to conquer, overcome, get the better of, defeat, subdue, vanquish, be victorious, To prevail, succeed, overcome, win, made easy, to win, to outbid. &mdash;To overcome, overwhelm, prevail over, extinguish, master, surmount, to cook, To outlast, survive, to prevail, be superior, convince, refute, constrain, overcome, am constrained, to express worthily, To overmatch, surpass, exceed, excel, To prove triumphantly, show conclusively, demonstrate, prove, I have established one point, To prevail, gain the point, carry the day, have your way, enjoy your victory
circumuincio -- to bind around
superuinco -- to overcome, conquer
praeuincio -- to bind before, in front, to fetter
praeuinco -- tr., surpasser de beaucoup
conuinco -- to overcome, convict, refute, expose*
peruinco -- to conquer completely, be victorious
peruinca -- pervenche (plante).
prouincia -- an office, duty, pursuit, charge, business, province*
prouinco -- to conquer before
deuincio -- to bind fast, tie up, fetter, clamp
deuinco -- to conquer completely, overcome, subdue
reuincio -- to bind back, tie behind
reuinco -- to conquer, subdue.
euinco -- to overcome, conquer, subdue, vanquish, overwhelm
euincio -- to bind up, wind around
__mon
commonitorium -- a writing for reminding, a letter of instructions*
admonitorium -- an admonition, a reminding
__pati
the quality of suffering, patience, endurance, submission, Forbearance, indulgence, lenity, Humility, Submission to lust, Submissiveness, subjection
compatientia -- c. compassio.
impatientia -- impatience, incapacity, weakness
__pend
compendiaria -- a short way, method;
compendiarium -- chemin plus court [fig.]
__cre
- tr. - faire croître. % Growth, increase
concrementum -- a mixture
incrementum -- growth, increase, augmentation, growth, increase, An addition, increment, reinforcement, addition to the family, foster-child, to an estate, A training-school, discipline
incremento -- to increase
accrementum -- accroissement.
decrementum -- a diminution, decrease
excrementum -- an excretion
recrementum -- refuse, filth, dross, slag, recrement, excrements*
__crep
concrepantia -- bruit sonore.
discrepantia -- discordance, dissimilarity, discrepancy
__flabell
to fan
conflabello -- to fan violently;
inflabello -- tr., souffler sur, exciter en soufflant
900
__fract=frang
a breach, fracture, cleft
confractura -- fracture, brèche.
effractura -- house-breaking, burglary*
infractura -- action de briser
__sanguin
to be bloody; to bleed, run with blood
consanguinea -- a sister
desanguino -- tr., saigner, tirer du sang de
exsanguinesco -- - intr. - être sanglant.
__sequ
that which follows, the sequence, context
consequentia -- a consequence, natural succession
obsequentia -- complaisance, obsequiousness*
__tiuncul#
contiuncula -- an harangue, petty speech
portiuncula -- a small part, portion, pr.
__tract=trah
contractorium -- a lace, string*
tractoria -- a letter of invitation, summons*
tractoriae -- an imperial letter containing an order to provide a person with necessaries on his journey*
__act=ag
actorium -- fonction de l'âme qui fait agir
__tract=trah
contractura -- a lessening, contracting
tractura -- action de traîner, de tirer
__coc
coctura -- a cooking; a melting; a manner, style of cooking
__dic
dicturio -- to long to say, tell
__rect=reg
rectura -- Uprightness
__sec
sectura -- a cutting, excavation, mine
__ueni
conuenientia -- agreement, harmony, symmetry
aduenientia -- an arrival
obuenientia -- chance, accident*
__uet
conueteranus -- a fellow-veteran
conueteraneus -- camarade vétéran.
__lira%
deliramentum -- nonsense, absurdity
deliramenta -- divagations, extravagances, folies.
__dic
dictabolarium -- a satirical saying
dictabolaria -- beißende Witze
__gnosc
dignoscentia -- the power of distinguishing, knowledge
cognoscentia -- die Erkenntnis
ignoscentia -- pardon, forgiveness, Plur.*
agnoscentia -- die Erkenntnis
__chinometr#
echinometra -- oursin de mer.
echinometrae -- a sort of sea-urchin
__deme%
epidemetica -- a payment in commutation for the liability to the quartering of troops*
epidemetici -- officiers qui distribuent les billets de logement*
__strateg
epistrategia -- the office of the second in command
epistrategus -- the second in command, second prefect
__lin (linen)
smearing-stuff, liniment
illinimentum -- a besmearing, anointing*
delinimentum -- any thing that soothes, charms, allures, a charm, blandishment, allurement, enticement*
__plic
a folding, doubling, a fold, plicature
implicatura -- an entangling
replicatura -- reprise à l'aiguille (??
__inter
want of reason, madness, senselessness, Folly % a strap, thong: % n'avoir pas sa raison
interamenta -- the interior woodwork
__super
superamentum -- a remainder, remnant
__digit
a finger, to touch gently, to touch lightly, to be exceedingly happy, skill in reckoning, by a snap of the finger, to point, bid at an auction, by signs, hold your tongue, not to move a finger.&mdash;A toe, A finger's breadth, inch, swerve a finger's breadth
interdigitia -- excrescences, between the fingers and toes
indigito -- to call upon, invoke
__femin
a female, woman, lady, unmanly, the female sex % to pollute one's self
interfeminium -- Apul. sexe (de la femme).
effemino -- to make feminine, represent as feminine, to make womanish, effeminate, enervate
__fring
interfringo -- to break to pieces
praefringo -- to break off before, break to pieces, shiver
confringo -- to break in pieces, shatter, to destroy, crush
perfringo -- to break through, break in pieces, shiver, shatter, broke through, his skull fractured, had been wrecked, break into, to break through, violate, infringe, affect powerfully.&mdash;To force a way, invade violently
diffringo -- to break in pieces, to shatter
profringo -- to break up
suffringo -- to break below, break
defringo -- to break off, break to pieces
effringo -- to break off, break open
infringo -- to break off, break, bruise, bruise on the threshold, To inflict, to break, subdue, overcome, check, weaken, mitigate, assuage, weaken, appeased, is broken off
refringo -- to break up, break open, tear off, break off, to break, break down, check, destroy
adfringo -- to strike upon, against, to break against, break in pieces
offringo -- to plough a second time; to cross-plough*
difringo -- to break in pieces, to shatter
__ordin
to order, set in order, arrange, adjust, dispose, regulate, To set in order, narrate, compose, record, record chronologically
interordinium -- the space between two rows*
superordino -- to appoint in addition, to add something to
praeordino -- to preordain
adordino -- to set in order, to arrange
inordino -- to arrange, bring into order
__sting
to put out, extinguish, dimming % orchis [plante]
interstinguo -- to separate, mark off, divide; to variegate, checker with
praestinguo -- c. praestringo.
exstinguo -- to put out, quench, extinguish
instinguo -- to instigate, incite, impel (only P. pass.)
restinguo -- to put out, quench, extinguish
__uigil
a watching, wakefulness, sleeplessness, lying awake, A keeping watch, watching, watch, guard, to take on guard, A watch, time of keeping watch, nights.&mdash;Plur., the watch, men on watch, watchmen, sentinels, post, guard, watchfulness, vigilance, A post, office, term of office % to watch, keep awake, not to sleep, be wakeful, To watch through, To perform watching, do at night, to be watchful, be vigilant % wakefulness, sleeplessness, a lying awake
interuigilo -- to watch between whiles, to awake now and then during sleep
praeuigilo -- int., être très vigilant
peruigilo -- to watch all night, remain awake, watch
peruigilia -- a watching all night long
peruigilium -- a devotional watching, vigil*
aduigilo -- to watch, be watchful:
inuigilo -- to watch over, be devoted, be intent
obuigilo -- to be watchful, vigilant
euigilo -- to be wakeful, be vigilant
__uoc
a calling, calling upon, summoning, invocation
introuocatus -- a calling in
aduocatus -- one called to aid, a friend who supports a party in a trial, an attendant, adviser, without his guard.&mdash;A pleader, advocate, an aid, helper
euocati -- les vétérans rappelés au service, les rappelés, les rengagés.
__strigill
obstrigillo -- to hinder, oppose, impede
obstrigillus -- a shoe-sole, sandal*
__fer
offerumentae -- présents, cadeaux, offrandes.*
offerumenta -- a present;, a stripe, cut*
__offic
officiperda -- qui fait mauvais emploi des services d'autrui*
officiperdus -- One who makes an ill use of the favors of others*
__ced
praecedentia -- précession [t. d'astronomie]
antecedentia -- 
abscedentia -- part. n. plur. de abscedo.@
accedentia -- action d'arriver à tel, tel état [en parlant de poissons]
__centur
praecenturio -- tr., diviser auparavant en centuries
concenturio -- to assemble by centuries;, to collect, bring together, to prepare
subcenturio -- to admit to a vacancy in a centuria; hence, to put in another's place, station as a substitute
__commod
to serve with, accommodate, grant, supply, lend, to furnish, to lend an ear to, their courtesy in lending, to grant, allow, To please, be kind, be obliging, serve, favor % a convenient opportunity, favorable condition, convenience, when it shall be convenient for you, at our convenience, Advantage, profit, gain, the goods of life, interests, there is this satisfaction, to the advantage of, consistently with the interests of, A reward, pay, stipend, salary, wages for public service, emoluments, A loan
praecommodo -- to advance as a loan, to give as a favor
1000
incommodum -- inconvenience, trouble, disadvantage, detriment, injury, misfortune, loss
incommodo -- to occasion inconvenience, be inconvenient, trouble, annoy
accommodo -- to fit, adapt, put on, apply:
__fascin
to enchant, bewitch, fascinate % a bundle of sticks, fagot % Prop., a charm, enchantment; hence, for membrum virile
praefascino -- tr., fasciner d'avance
effascino -- to bewitch, charm, fascinate
__festin
to hasten, make haste, be in haste, hurry, be quick, To make haste with, hasten, hurry, accelerate, drive, do speedily, promptly execute, are not married early, premature, prepare hastily, prematurely inflicled
praefestino -- to hasten before, be precipitate
adfestino -- - tr. - Ps. Soran. hâter.
refestino -- to hasten back again
__formid
praeformido -- to fear beforehand
performido -- to fear greatly
adformido -- to be afraid, to fear;
reformido -- to fear greatly, dread, stand in awe, shrink, shudder, be afraid
__fulg
to lighten % - 1 - intr. - lancer des éclairs, lancer la foudre. - 2 - tr. - frapper de la foudre.
praefulguro -- to flash forth
praefulgurat -- int. [n'est usité qu'à la 3e pers.], briller [comme l'éclair], étinceler / tr., remplir de clarté, éclairer, illuminer
diffulguro -- to scatter lightning around
perfulguro -- blitzen
defulguro -- to flash forth
effulguro -- int., jeter une lueur, briller
__germin
to sprout, bud % to sprout, shoot
praegermino -- to bud forth early
congermino -- to shoot forth at the same time
progermino -- to shoot forth, germinate
regermino -- to spring forth, sprout, germinate again
egermino -- to put forth, shoot, sprout
__pond=pend
to weigh, value the pockets, to weigh, ponder, consider, reflect
praepondero -- to make heavier, regard as superior
depondero -- to press down by its weight, to weigh down
repondero -- to weigh in return;, to repay, return
__potent
might, force, power, source of my power, Efficacy, virtue, political power, authority, sway, influence, eminence, in great authority, monarchical, sovereignty % int., exercer le pouvoir
praepotentes -- the powerful
praepotentia -- superior power
impotentia -- helplessness, weakness, Ungovernableness, violence, fury, unbridled passion, fiery violence
__proper
to make haste, hasten, be quick, be in haste, go quickly, in haste, to another subject, the running to and fro, To quicken, accelerate, prepare with haste, be sung briefly
praepropero -- to hasten greatly
compropero -- int., se hâter ensemble
impropero -- to hasten into, enter hastily;
improperium -- a reproach, taunt
appropero -- to hasten, accelerate:
depropero -- to hasten, prepare hastily
__sci
a knowing, knowledge, intelligence, science, to express as much as you already know, knowledge, skill, expertness, art, jurisprudence . . . oratory, requiring so great knowledge, Theory
praescientia -- foreknowledge, prescience
conscientia -- joint knowledge, consciousness, common knowledge, privity, cogni, zance, Consciousness, knowledge, feeling, sense, he was keenly aware, A sense of right, moral sense, conscience, a good conscience, of self - approval, scruple, the moral judgment, A good conscience, self - approval, A sense of guilt, remorse, ne, guilty fear
inscientia -- want of knowledge, ignorance, inexperience
__sent
praesentaneum -- a remedy that operates quickly*
consentanea -- it agrees with something, it is according to reason, fitting, consistent, proper
__sidi=sede
praesidiarium -- poste militaire.*
subsidiarii -- the reserve, body of reserve*
__tent=ten
praetentura -- a military guard on the boundaries of a province, a frontier-guard
retentura -- (Lebaigue P. 1095 et P. 1096) Hyg. troisième partie intérieure d'un camp (située entre la Via quintana et la Porta decumana).
__bi=eo
to go
praeterbito -- to go by, to pass
interbito -- to perish, come to naught*
praebita -- fourniture des choses nécessaires à la vie, pension alimentaire.#
perbito -- To go over
probito -- to move forward
abbito -- - intr. - s'en aller.
adbito -- to come, draw near, to approach
imbito -- to go into, enter
rebito -- to turn back, return
ebito -- 
__duc
to lead, conduct, guide, direct, draw, bring, fetch, escort, under the conduct of, from the scabbard, bend, for Neptune, draw, row, spin, milk, govern, be broken-winded, make wry faces, to great glory, appropriate, to lead, conduct, se, to betake oneself, go, to take, arrest, lead away, drag, carry off, to be imprisoned, to lead home, take, marry, the bridegroom, wedded, to lead, guide, cause to move, march, led forward, march, moves, To lead, command, be commander of, in Caesar's army, To lead, be leader of, be the head of, be first in, To take in, inhale, drink, quaff, imbibe, To produce, form, construct, make, fashion, shape, mould, cast, dispose, to erect, draw, spin out, to conduct, marshal, lead, accompany, To receive, admit, take, get, assume, to grow pale, to lead, guide, draw, conduct, fill with forebodings, carries off, makes acceptable, followed, To draw, deduce, derive, To lead, move, incite, induce, allure, charm, To mislead, cheat, deceive, to draw out, extend, protract, prolong, spend, live long, put off, spend. &mdash; To calculate, compute, reckon, To reckon, consider, hold, account, esteem, regard, construe as, expected, To regard, care for, have respect to, rationem, one's own advantage
praeterduco -- to lead past, by
circumduco -- to lead around, draw around:
subterduco -- to carry off secretly, to steal away
introduco -- to lead in, bring in, introduce, conduct within, admit
transduco -- - to bring across/over, move/transfer; to convert; to cause to cross/to extend across - to lead across; to exhibit/display/carry past in parade/procession; to pass/get
retroduco -- to bring, draw back
superduco -- to lead, draw over, med., to bring, put over
praeduco -- to draw out before, construct in front
conduco -- to draw together, assemble, collect, gather, unite:
perduco -- to lead through, lead, bring, conduct, guide
subduco -- to draw away, take away, lead away, carry off, wrest, withdraw, remove
traduco -- to lead across, bring through, conduct across, carry over, must be carried over to him, parade, to ride on, to lead across, convey across, transport over, to lead over, transfer, remove, turn, promoted, To bring over, draw over, convert, To lead in parade, make a show of, expose, dishonor, disgrace, degrade, traduce, To make public, exhibit, parade, display, proclaim, spread abroad, to lead, spend, pass, to administer*
abduco -- to lead away, take away, carry off, remove, lead aside:
adduco -- to lead to, bring to, bring along
deduco -- to lead away, draw out, turn aside, divert, bring out, remove, drive off, draw down
diduco -- to draw apart, part, split, separate, sever, sunder, divide, undo, relax
induco -- to lead in, bring in, introduce, conduct, lead up, bring forward
indutiae -- a suspension of hostitities, truce, armistice, put an end to, during the truce#
obduco -- to draw before, draw forward, bring over
educo -- to bring up, rear, train, educate, develops, To produce, support, raise
__lab=labor
to totter, be ready to fall, begin to sink, give way, be loosened, roll, is unsteady, sink, to waver, be unstable, be undecided, hesitate, waver in fidelity, becomes weak, To sink, fall to pieces, go to ruin % to glide, slide, move, slip, float, pass, flow, in folds, from heaven, escaped, To sink, fall, slip, stumbling, falling, to move gently, be led insensibly, glide, pass, elapse, am led, be lost, To sink, incline, decline, begin to fall, go to ruin, perish, for our ruined condition, deceived in, To fall into error, be mistaken, err, mistake, commit a fault % to waver, yield % - 1 - lèvre. - 2 - Cato. bord du pressoir. % a lip % Apul. lèvre.
praeterlabor -- to glide by, flow by, run past, Fig., to slip away
subterlabor -- to glide below, float under
interlabor -- to flow between
superlabor -- to glide, run over.
translabor -- tr., franchir [d'un glissement d'ailes]
praelabor -- to glide before, move by, float past
prolabor -- to glide forward, slide along, slip
sublabor -- to glide under, slip away, sink
sublabium -- a plant, dog's-tongue#
collabor -- to collapse, fall down/in ruin; to fall in swoon/exhaustion/death; to slip/slink (meet)
collabasco -- to totter, be about to fall at the same time, to waver with
perlabor -- to slip through, glide over
delabor -- to fall, sink, slip down, glide down, descend
dilabor -- to fall asunder, go to pieces, melt away, dissolve
relabor -- to slide back, sink back
adlabor -- to glide towards, flow, glide, slide:
adlabo -- c. adlavo.??
illabor -- to fall, slip, slide, glide, flow into; to fall down, sink down
sulaba -- a syllable.#
elabor -- to slip away; to escape; to elapse
__ueh
to bear, carry, convey, draw, has brought, to ride, to sail, borne, carried over, rushing, borne in triumph, P. praes. intrans. % Varr. c. via.
praeteruehor -- to be borne past, drive by
circumuehor -- to ride around, sail around:
superueho -- to carry over
superuehor -- to pass by, sail by, turn
transueho -- to carry across, convey over, bear to the other side, transport, Fig., of time, to pass, elapse
praeuehor -- to ride in front, flow past, sail by
1100
perueho -- to bear through, convey through
proueho -- to carry forward, move along, convey (old in act.)
subueho -- to support and convey, bring up, transport, conduct, carry up
conueho -- to carry together, collect, store
conuehor -- fahren
traueho -- a??
adueho -- to bring hither, carry to, conduct:
deueho -- to carry down, carry off, convey, take away
inueho -- to carry in, bring to, introduce
reueho -- to carry back, bring back, convey back
exueho -- c. eveho.
seuehor -- int., [fig.] s'en aller loin de
abueho -- to carry off, away, to bear off, Pl., La., acc., Pass., to be carried away, to ride away, to depart
aueho -- to carry off, take away, have sailed away, rode away
eueho -- to carry out, bring forth, convey out, lead forth
__trepid
to hurry with alarm, be in confusion, be agitated, be disturbed, To tremble at, be afraid of, to waver, hesitate, tremble, be at a loss, to tremble, waver, shake, flicker, palpitate, has hastened
praetrepido -- int., être affairé, pressé, agité
pertrepido -- - intr. - Juvc. être affairé, être pressé, être impatient.
attrepido -- to hobble along
intrepido -- to perform tremblingly, hastily, rapidly*
__ual
praeualentia -- superior force
inualentia -- weakness, inability, indisposition
__uide
praeuidentia -- v. providentia
prouidentia -- foresight, foreknowledge, Foresight, forethought, precaution, providence
inuidentia -- envy, jealousy*
euidentia -- distinctness, vivid presentation
__cras
to-morrow, the morrow
procrastino -- to put off till the morrow, defer, delay, procrastinate
recrastino -- to put off from day to day, to procrastinate
__cub
procubitores -- the night-watch*
accubitorium -- - 1 - tombeau. - 2 - bâtiment pour sépulcre.*
excubitorium -- a post where guards were stationed, sub fin.*
__gen
to bend the knee % an angular bend where two pipes are joined together, a knee
progeniculo -- to fall on the knees, to beg on one's knees
ingeniculo -- to cause one to bend the knee;, to bend the knee, to sink down on the knee, to kneel
__gnos
prognostica -- harbingers, weather-signs (a work of Aratus translated by Cicero)
prognosticum -- a sign, token, a prognostic;
__sellistern
sellisternia -- religious banquets offered to goddesses
sellisternium -- Sellisterne (fête en l'honneur des déesses, dont les images étaient placées sur des sièges).
__sestertiol
sestertiolum -- a thousand sesterces
sestertiolus -- Mart. un petit sesterce.
__lig
a band, ligature
subligatura -- c. subligar
adligatura -- a band, tie
obligatura -- a band, bandage
__rostr
subrostrani -- people who hang about the forum near the rostra, loungers, idlers
surrostrani -- people who hang about the forum near the rostra, loungers, idlers
__sist=sto
subsistentia -- the substance, reality
exsistentia -- existence.
resistentia -- resistance, opposition
__abund
to overflow, stream over, of a river or lake:
superabundo -- to be very abundant, to superabound
exabundo -- to abound exceedingly
__lig
to bind together, tie up, bind fast, fetter, make fast
super.de.ligo -- to bind upon, over
sub.de.ligo -- to choose*
__gen
to beget, procreate, engender, produce, create, springs % to be generated, produced
supergenero -- to produce more and more
congenero -- - tr. - 1 - Varr. engendrer ensemble. - 2 - C.-Aur. engendrer avec, occasionner. - 3 - associer, joindre, unir, ajouter.
progenero -- to beget, generate
degenero -- to be inferior to ancestors, decline, be degenerate, to fall off, decline, degenerate, to dishonor, disgrace, fall short of, has lost the victorious spirit
regenero -- to bring forth again, reproduce
adgenero -- to beget in addition to
ingenero -- to implant, engender, produce
__nom
to call by name, name, give a name to, takes its name, mention with respect, To render famous, make renowned, celebrate, To name for office, designate, nominate, To talk of, call attention to, urge, To name, mention, report, accuse, arraign, accuses as a conspirator % substantives that are not declined, aptotes
supernomino -- to surname
transnomino -- to name over again, change the name of, to
praenomino -- to give, the pr&oelig;nomen, title of, to name
pronomino -- - tr. - désigner par un pronom.
denomino -- to call, name
adnomino -- - tr. - admettre au nom, épouser, marier.
annomino -- - tr. - Aug. admettre au nom, épouser.
__numer
a number, about, that they be counted, counting, the full number, the count of the flock, A considerable number, quantity, body, collection, class, sum, complement, quantity, many, troops, A mere number, cipher, nobody, rabble, dice, the mathematics, astronomy, number, rank, place, position, estimation, relation, class, category, reckoned among, of no repute, of some repute, A part, member, category, to be deficient, Order, An office, duty, part, Musical measure, time, rhythm, harmony, numbers, air, out of measure, improper, a measure, number, A verse, heroic metre, elegiac verses % to count, enumerate, reckon, number, take account of, be sure of a quorum, to count out, pay out, pay, paid just now or long ago, To recount, relate, to reckon, number, possess, own, To account, reckon, esteem, consider, regard, hold
supernumero -- to count in over and above
transnumero -- to count over, count out
pernumero -- to count out, reckon up
connumero -- to number with, to reckon among, Absol.
pronumero -- to count up, reckon, enumerate
abnumero -- to cast up numbers, to reckon up
adnumero -- to add, join, count among:
annumero -- - tr. - 1 - compter à, remettre en comptant; compter. 2 - ajouter au compte de, ajouter. 3 - présenter un compte de. 4 - attribuer à, imputer à.
denumero -- tr., compter / [abst] compter de l'argent
dinumero -- to count, reckon, enumerate, compute
renumero -- to count over, count up., to pay back, repay
__cup=cap
to take into possession, seize, occupy, master, win, chieftains were aiming at, clasps, To occupy, cover, take up, fill, To fall upon, attack, strikes, the face, fetters while prostrate, surprise, To get the start of, be before-hand with, anticipate, do first, outstrip, begin the war first, To hinder, to seize, take possession of, fill, invade, overspread, engross, are darkened, To gain, win, acquire, pass for reserved, To take up, fill, occupy, employ, invested at high interest
superoccupo -- to take by surprise, take unawares
anteoccupo -- - tr. - anticiper, prévenir.
praeoccupo -- to seize upon beforehand, preoccupy
exoccupo -- to discharge of employment, free from occupation
__scend=scand
superscendo -- to climb, step over
transscendo -- to climb, pass, cross, step over, to overstep, surmount.
conscendo -- to mount, ascend, climb, To go on board, embark, to go to sea, set sail, to rise to
descendo -- to climb down, come down, descend, fall, sink
exscendo -- lut, sate
inscendo -- to step into, upon, to climb up, mount, ascend.
escendo -- to climb up, mount, ascend, to go up
ascendo -- to mount, climb, ascend, scale, go up, to Delphi, to rise, mount, ascend, reach, to surpass, to become louder
__semin
a begetting, procreation % to sow, bring forth, produce
supersemino -- to, sow upon, over, med.
praesemino -- to sow, plant beforehand
dissemino -- to spread abroad, disseminate
consemino -- - tr. - engendrer avec.
prosemino -- to sow, scatter, plant
insemino -- to sow, plant in, to implant
resemino -- to sow again, produce again, reproduce
__still
a drop, viscous drop % to make drops, give drops, drop, distil, drip, to fall in drops, drop, trickle, to instil, whisper, breathe
superstillo -- to drop upon, pour on drop by drop
perstillo -- to leak, drip
substillum -- bruine, temps humide
destillo -- to drip, trickle down, to distil
exstillesco -- - intr. - couler par gouttes.
exstillo -- to trickle away, melt
1200
instillo -- to pour in by drops, drop in, instil
restillo -- to drop back; to fall back in drops.
__turb
to confuse, disturb, confound, throw into disorder
sup.per.turbo -- - tr. - Sen. troubler un peu.
sup.per.turbor -- ein wenig bestürzt werden
__tragacanth__
tragacantha -- goat, s-thorn, tragacanth-bush
tragacanthum -- gum-tragacanth
__tragorigan__
tragoriganum -- a plant, goat, s-thyme
tragoriganus -- le thym tragorigan ou faux origan [plante]
__fig=fing
a form, shape, figure, animal forms, phantoms, Beauty, a quality, kind, form, style, nature, manner, ways, a figure of speech, ornament of style % to form, fashion, shape, to form, train, educate
transfiguro -- to change in shape, to transform, transfigure, metamorphose
praefiguro -- to prefigure
configuro -- to form from, after something, to fashion accordingly
adfiguro -- to form, fashion after, disciplinosus, consiliosus, victoriosus, vinosus, formosus
defiguro -- - tr. - Iren. symboliser.
refiguro -- to form again, refashion
exfiguro -- c. figuro
__plant
a sprout, shoot, twig, graft, A young plant, set, slip, A sole, sole of the foot, be dragged by the heel % to propagate from cuttings; to set out, transplant (L+S); to fix in place; to form, make;
transplanto -- to transplant, remove
complanto -- to plant together
supplanto -- to trip up the heels of, throw down
deplanto -- To take off a twig, shoot
explanto -- to pull up, root out
implanto -- - tr. - planter dans.
replanto -- tr., replanter
__uar
to spread the legs apart, to straddle, can stride over it
transuarico -- to stretch the feet apart, to straddle
praeuarico -- (Lebaigue P. 992) - tr. - Aug. transgresser, désobéir à; pécher.
praeuaricor -- to be a false advocate, collude, prevaricate
diuarico -- to spread asunder, stretch apart
__uoc
aduocamentum -- advocandi
auocamentum -- a means of diverting from, an alleviation, diversion, relaxation, recreation*
__farc
to stuff, cram
circumfarcio -- to fill up all around, to stuff
effarcio -- to stuff, fill out
infarcio -- To stuff into
__plex=plect
circumplexor -- tr., embrasser
complexus -- a surrounding, encompassing, encircling, embracing, embrace, clasp, grasp, close combat, a firm grasp, embrace, affection, love, bosom, his chosen and bosom friends
complexo -- to encompass, embrace closely, clasp around
complexor -- to embrace closely
perplexor -- to make confusion, cause perplexity
implexus -- interwoven, entwined, Involved
__spum
foam, froth, scum, spume % to foam, froth, covered with foam, foaming with wrath, frothed over % to grow frothy, begin to foam
circumspumo -- umschäumen
despumo -- to skim off, skim
exspumo -- to froth, foam out
inspumo -- to foam, rage
__surg
to rise, arise, get up, stand up, to rise, arise, take the floor, to break up, march, To rise, arise, leave one's bed, awaken, To go up, rise, mount up, ascend, into life, towering, stands, To rise, spring up, grow up, be built, growing, to rise, arise, occur, swell, To rise to, rise against, attempt, attack
circumsurgo -- sich ringsum erheben
praesurgo -- to rise beforehand
consurgo -- to rise, stand up, arise, start up, rise in a body, lift oneself
prosurgo -- to rise up
insurgo -- to rise up, rise, lift oneself
resurgo -- to rise again, appear again, lift onself
adsurgo -- to rise up, rise, stand up:
exsurgo -- to rise up, rise, get up, stand up
desurgo -- to rise from, to rise
__propinqu=prope
to draw near, come nigh, approach, To bring near, bring on, hasten, accelerate % neighborhood, vicinity
compropinquo -- int., s'approcher ensemble
appropinquo -- to come near, approach, draw nigh:
depropinquo -- int., approcher
__sul2
consultantes -- they who seek advice;, clients
__sult=salt
exsultantia -- a springing up, an attack
__tamin
contaminata -- adulterated things, Comp.
contaminati -- abandoned youths
__bland
to fawn, soothe, caress, fondle, coax, believes what he wishes, To flatter, make flattering speeches, be complaisant, timidly coaxing, to speak plainly, to please, soothe, gratify, To entice, allure, invite
interblandior -- dazwischen schmeicheln
subblandior -- to caress, fondle a little
abblandior -- - intr. - Hilar. flatter, cajoler.
adblandior -- - intr. - Eccl. chercher à obtenir par flatterie, cajoler.
eblandior -- to persuade by flattery, obtain by coaxing
__oli__
oliuastellum -- kleiner wilder Ölbaum
oliuastellus -- petit olivier sauvage
__gubern
to steer, pilot % a steersman, pilot % a helm, rudder
praeguberno -- vorwärts steuern, -lenken
adguberno -- to steer (one's course);
__nun=nom
to call by name, call, name, to take publicly, offer, utter, vow, To proclaim formally
praenuncupo -- tr., nommer d'avance
connuncupo -- tr., appeler du même nom, nommer ensemble
__rog
praerogantia -- droit, prétention
adrogantia -- assumption, presumption, arrogance, Pride, haughtiness, with haughty indifference
__stomach
to be irritated, be angry, fume, fret, at your letter, quarrelled % the gullet, alimentary canal, oesophagus, The stomach, Fig., taste, liking, Temper, bile, displeasure, irritation, vexation, chagrin, anger
substomachor -- etwas unwillig-, etwas verdrießlich sein
destomachor -- int., se dépiter
__limin
superliminium -- 
postliminium -- a return behind the threshold, complete return home, restoration of rank and privileges, right of recovery, postliminium, no right of return, by resuming his citizenship in Gades
colliminium -- c. collimitium.
elimino -- to put out of doors, to blab
__rut
to grow reddish % to redden, make reddish, To redden, have a reddish glow
superrutilo -- int., briller en dessus
subrutilo -- to glow slightly, to glimmer forth
surrutilo -- to glow slightly, to glimmer forth
irrutilo -- to glimmer redly, to be ruddy
__pos
suppositorium -- suppositoire [t. de méd.] / plateau pour des gobelets
repositorium -- that on, in which any thing is placed, laid.
depositorium -- der Aufbewahrungsort
__mar
transmarina -- pays d'outre-mer
permarini -- les lares marins (dieux des navigateurs).
__tect=tego
architectus -- a masterbuilder, architect.
architecta -- 
architector -- to build, construct, to devise, invent
__iic=iaci
circumiicio -- RACE
interiicio -- to throw, cast between; to set, place, put between; to join, add to, to intermix, part. pass.
transiicio -- rx??
praeiicio -- to cast, throw up in front
coniicio -- uids??
subiicio -- ee??
traiicio -- to transfer; to transport; to pierce, transfix;
disiicio -- to throw asunder; to drive asunder; to scatter, disperse
abiicio -- Ō??
adiicio -- NG??
iniicio -- to hurl/throw/strike in/into; to inject; to put on; to inspire, instill (feeling, etc);
1300
obiicio -- to throw before/to, cast; to object, oppose; to upbraid; to throw in one's teeth; to present;
deiicio -- s??
__ic=iaci
proicio -- to throw forth, cast before, throw out, throw down, throw, thrown to you, carried out to sea and threw overboard, To throw away, cast out, cast off, let go, abandon, To throw forward, hold out, extend, hold in front, was extended, reflex., to throw oneself, fall prostrate, To cast out, expel, exile, banish, to throw away, give up, yield, resign, sacrifice, reject, killed themselves, To neglect, desert, abandon, To throw, hurry, precipitate, thrust themselves, act precipitately, abandon themselves to, run riot.&mdash;To put off, delay
__nom
cognomentum -- a surname, A name
agnomentum -- Apul. surnom, sobriquet.
__ment=mens
commentarium -- notebook, private/historical journal; register; memo/note; commentary/treatise;
commentarius -- a notebook, notes, memorandum, memoirs, records, the works upon the Gallic and civil wars
__celebr
to frequent, throng, crowd, fill, To do frequently, practise, engage in, reiterate, dwell upon, repeat, made frequent, kept in the foreground, To celebrate, solemnize, keep, To fill with, cause to resound, are filled. &mdash; To make known, publish abroad, proclaim, To honor, praise, celebrate with praise, celebrate in song, to make renowned % to become renowned
concelebro -- to attend in numbers, frequent, celebrate, solemnize:
percelebro -- to pronounce frequently, have often in one's mouth
__clam
to cry aloud, bawl, vociferate, call, impers., to proclaim, reveal, betray
conclamito -- to keep shouting loudly; to cry; to call/cry out loudly (L+S);
declamito -- to practise declamation, declaim, to plead for practice.&mdash;To talk violently, bluster
exclamito -- s'écrier souvent ou fortement.
inclamito -- to call out, exclaim against, to abuse, scold
occlamito -- to cry out, cry aloud, bawl
reclamito -- to cry loudly against, exclaim against
acclamito -- 
__fide
confidence, boldness
confidentia -- confidence, boldness, Assurance, audacity, impudence
diffidentia -- want of confidence, mistrust, distrust, diffidence
__iect=iaci
coniectanea -- a memorandum- or commonplace-book, a title of works of miscellaneous contents*
reiectanea -- maux à traiter avec dédain (dans le langage des stoïciens).*
__sobrin=soror
a cousin by the mother's side, mother's sister's child, cousin-german % a cousin-german, cousin
consobrinus -- a mother's sister's son, cousin-german, first cousin
consobrina -- a (female) cousin
__stitu=statu
constitutum -- an agreement, appointment, compact, by arbitration
prostituta -- unchaste
institutum -- a purpose, intention, design, A practice, custom, usage, habit, principles, precedent, precedents, according to usage, An institution, ordinance, decree, regulation, plans.&mdash;Plur., principles, elements
__cip=cap
disciplina -- instruction, tuition, teaching, training, education, the objects of instruction, Learning, knowledge, science, discipline, culture, tactics, military* discipline, statesmanship, severity, orderly way, the art of governing, a system, A custom, habit, A school, sects*
disciplinor -- discipliner, former.*
__crimin
to accuse of crime, complain of, impeach, calumniate, To complain of, charge, denounce % to accuse, make an accusation
discrimino -- to divide, part, separate, apportion
concriminor -- to make bitter accusations, to complain*
__dict=dic
to dictate, suggest, remind, put in their mouths, to you, compose, appointed, designated, direct the charge % something said, a saying, word, assertion, remark, of poetry, books, on the word, A saying, maxim, proverb, A witty saying, bon-mot, prophecies, An order, command, A promise, assurance
interdictum -- a forbiden thing, A prohibition, a provisional decree, interlocutory order, prohibition, interdict, subject to a guardian
maledictum -- a foul saying, abusive word
benedictum -- 1 - bĕnĕ dictum : bonne parole, bon propos. 2 - bénédiction.
praedictum -- something previously said, as if by preconcert, A foretelling, prediction, prophecy, An order, command
condictum -- pacte, convention.
edictum -- a proclamation, ordinance, edict, manifesto, an edict, inaugural address, learned in the law as defined by successive praetors, An order, command
edicto -- to speak out, proclaim, publish
__pret
a price, money value, value in exchange, fix, paid, cheaply, purchase, ransom, for a ransom, prize, money, wealth, a shower of gold, Value, worth, of any value, to be esteemed, prize, Pay, hire, wages, bribe, bribery, worth, value, esteem, value their services, Recompense, return, reward, prizes, it is worth the trouble, operae, a return for trouble, worth the effort, worth while, produce a work worth the pains, their service is well rewarded by freedom, a prize, Recompense, punishment % a kind of grape-vine % to prize
interpretor -- to explain, expound, interpret, understand, conclude, infer, comprehend, understood, inferred, To decide, determine, To translate, impers.
interpretium -- the difference between the buying and selling price, profit
interpreto -- c. interpretor.
appretio -- To value, estimate at a price, to appraise, rate, med.
depretio -- to lower the price of, to undervalue, to depreciate
__cipit=cap
praecipitium -- a steep place, an abrupt descent, a precipice*
praecipito -- to throw headlong, cast down, hurl down, precipitate, hurl against, throw overboard, threw themselves down, sets in the ocean, run this way for life!, threaten to throw them down.&mdash;To rush down, throw oneself down, rush headlong, sink rapidly, drop, tumble, fall, is sinking, had come to an end, to throw down, hurl down, precipitate, destroy oneself, carry headlong, declining, To hasten, hurry, hasten their setting, precipitate, exchange for haste, hasten, To fall down, fall, sink, be ruined, may tumble down, To be too hasty, be precipitate, to jump at a conclusion*
__cipit=caput
occipitium -- back of the head, occiput;
__tempt=temp
to handle, touch, feel, to feel the pulse, To make trial of, try, attempt, attack, assail, To try, experiment upon, prove, test, attempt, essay, something to eat, To try, urge, incite, tempt, sound, tamper with, To disquiet, worry, excite, disturb, agitate, distress
praetempto -- to examine previously, make trial
contemptus -- a despising, contempt, scorn, the slight done to, A being despised, slight received, disagrace, insignificance, an object of contempt
attempto -- to strive after, to attempt, essay, try, make trial of; to solicit; to assail, attack, temptata, to seek to defile, pollute
__tent=tene
retento -- to hold back firmly, keep back, hold fast, To preserve, maintain / see retempto.
__flu
to weep, cry, shed tears, lament, wail, with tears, shall smart for it, bewail, lamented % to flow, stream, melts, To flow, overflow, run down, drip, dripping, yield, To flow, stream, pour, throng, glide, spreading, droops, pour forth, sinking, To pass away, fall away, fall off, vanish, are changing, to flow, spring, arise, come forth, go, proceed, To roll, flow, move, spread, to be fluent, be verbose, be monotonous, To pass away, dissolve, vanish, perish % to blow, sound, is blown, To coin, mould, cast
praeterfluo -- to flow by, flow past
circumfluo -- to flow around:
/circumfleo -- - intr. - pleurer tout autour.
/circumflo -- to blow around:
subterfluo -- to flow beneath
interfluo -- to flow between or through;
interfluum -- détroit
superfluo -- to overflow, flow over brim/sides/surface; to be superfluous/superabundant/surplus;
superflua -- les excréments
transfluo -- to flow, run through
praefluo -- to flow along, flow by
/conflo -- to blow up, kindle, light:
confluo -- to flow together, run together:
/confleo -- tr., pleurer ensemble
diffluo -- to flow in different directions, flow away, branches, To be dissolved, To be abandoned to, wasted away, loose, not periodic
/diffleo -- to cry/weep away (one's eyes);
/difflo -- to blow apart, disperse by blowing
/perflo -- to blow through, blow over
perfluo -- to leak
profluo -- to flow forth, flow along
/proflo -- to blow forth, breathe out.
/sufflo -- Act., to blow forth from below; to blow up, puff out, inflate.
/defleo -- to weep over, lament, deplore, bewail
defluo -- to flow down
/deflo -- To blow off, away
/efflo -- to blow out, breathe out, exhale, his last breath, dying
effluo -- to flow out, flow forth, run out, escape, slipped from, to transpire, become known, To drop out, pass away, disappear, vanish, be excluded, to be forgotten
/effleo -- to weep out, exhaust by weeping
/inflo -- to blow into, blow, inflate, swell
influo -- to flow in, run in
/reflo -- to blow back, blow in opposition, be contrary
refluo -- to flow back, flow off, overflow
/adflo -- to blow on, breathe upon:
adfluo -- to flow to, flow towards, flow by:
/adfla -- souffle.
/adfleo -- to weep at
offla -- a little bit, a small piece#
afluo -- c. adfluo.
__fle
/praeterfluo -- to flow by, flow past
/circumfluo -- to flow around:
circumfleo -- - intr. - pleurer tout autour.
/circumflo -- to blow around:
/subterfluo -- to flow beneath
/interfluo -- to flow between or through;
/interfluum -- détroit
/superfluo -- to overflow, flow over brim/sides/surface; to be superfluous/superabundant/surplus;
/superflua -- les excréments
/transfluo -- to flow, run through
/praefluo -- to flow along, flow by
/conflo -- to blow up, kindle, light:
/confluo -- to flow together, run together:
confleo -- tr., pleurer ensemble
/diffluo -- to flow in different directions, flow away, branches, To be dissolved, To be abandoned to, wasted away, loose, not periodic
diffleo -- to cry/weep away (one's eyes);
/difflo -- to blow apart, disperse by blowing
/perflo -- to blow through, blow over
/perfluo -- to leak
/profluo -- to flow forth, flow along
/proflo -- to blow forth, breathe out.
/sufflo -- Act., to blow forth from below; to blow up, puff out, inflate.
defleo -- to weep over, lament, deplore, bewail
/defluo -- to flow down
/deflo -- To blow off, away
/efflo -- to blow out, breathe out, exhale, his last breath, dying
/effluo -- to flow out, flow forth, run out, escape, slipped from, to transpire, become known, To drop out, pass away, disappear, vanish, be excluded, to be forgotten
effleo -- to weep out, exhaust by weeping
/inflo -- to blow into, blow, inflate, swell
/influo -- to flow in, run in
/reflo -- to blow back, blow in opposition, be contrary
/refluo -- to flow back, flow off, overflow
/adflo -- to blow on, breathe upon:
/adfluo -- to flow to, flow towards, flow by:
/adfla -- souffle.
adfleo -- to weep at
/offla -- a little bit, a small piece
/afluo -- c. adfluo.
__flo
/praeterfluo -- to flow by, flow past
/circumfluo -- to flow around:
/circumfleo -- - intr. - pleurer tout autour.
circumflo -- to blow around:
/subterfluo -- to flow beneath
/interfluo -- to flow between or through;
/interfluum -- détroit
/superfluo -- to overflow, flow over brim/sides/surface; to be superfluous/superabundant/surplus;
/superflua -- les excréments
/transfluo -- to flow, run through
/praefluo -- to flow along, flow by
conflo -- to blow up, kindle, light:
/confluo -- to flow together, run together:
/confleo -- tr., pleurer ensemble
/diffluo -- to flow in different directions, flow away, branches, To be dissolved, To be abandoned to, wasted away, loose, not periodic
/diffleo -- to cry/weep away (one's eyes);
difflo -- to blow apart, disperse by blowing
perflo -- to blow through, blow over
/perfluo -- to leak
/profluo -- to flow forth, flow along
proflo -- to blow forth, breathe out.
sufflo -- Act., to blow forth from below; to blow up, puff out, inflate.
/defleo -- to weep over, lament, deplore, bewail
/defluo -- to flow down
deflo -- To blow off, away
efflo -- to blow out, breathe out, exhale, his last breath, dying
/effluo -- to flow out, flow forth, run out, escape, slipped from, to transpire, become known, To drop out, pass away, disappear, vanish, be excluded, to be forgotten
/effleo -- to weep out, exhaust by weeping
inflo -- to blow into, blow, inflate, swell
/influo -- to flow in, run in
reflo -- to blow back, blow in opposition, be contrary
/refluo -- to flow back, flow off, overflow
/adflo -- to blow on, breathe upon:
/adfluo -- to flow to, flow towards, flow by:
/adfla -- souffle.
/adfleo -- to weep at
/offla -- a little bit, a small piece
/afluo -- c. adfluo.
__tegr=tang
to begin anew, break out afresh % to make whole, set, To renew, begin again, to recreate, refresh
redintegro -- to make whole again, restore, renew, recruit, refresh*
deintegro -- to impair, destroy*
__scend=scand
transcendo -- to climb over, pass over, cross, overstep, surmount, to pass over, pass by, overstep, transcend, transgress, violate
__cend=cand
succendo -- to kindle beneath, set on fire below, to kindle, inflame, fire
incendium -- a burning, fire, conflagration, firebrands, fire, flame, heat, glow, vehemence, gentle passions
incendo -- to set fire to, kindle, burn, wast consumed.&mdash;To light up with fire, kindle, in pursuance of vows, To brighten, illumine, to kindle, inflame, set on fire, fire, rouse, incite, excite, irritate, incense, enrage
__scrib
transcribo -- to write over, transcribe, write anew, transfer in writing, alter, forge
discribo -- to distribute, divide, apportion, assign*
__form
a form, contour, figure, shape, appearance, looks % to shape, fashion, form, build, depicted, to shape, form, regulate, dispose, direct, prepare, compose, invent, imagine
transformo -- to change in shape, transform, transfigure, metamorphose
praeformo -- to form, fashion beforehand, to instruct beforehand, to prepare
conformo -- to form, fashion, shape:
performo -- to form thoroughly, to form
deformo -- to bring out of shape, deform, disfigure, spoil, mar, to mar, spoil, deteriorate, disgrace, dishonor
informo -- to shape, mould, fashion
reformo -- to shape again, transform, metamorphose, change
1400
__port2
a city-gate, gate, An avenue, entrance, passage, outlet, inlet, door, passes % to bear, carry, convey, take, had on board, to bear, carry, bring, imports, bringing % a harbor, haven, port, sail from port, enter, reach, to be an officer of the customs, the revenue from customs, am out of danger, mouths, a place of refuge, haven, asylum, retreat, security is at hand
transporto -- to carry over, take across, carry, convey, remove, transport
introporto -- to bring in
praeporto -- to bear before
comporto -- to bring in, carry together, collect, accumulate, gather:
supporto -- to convey, bring up, bring forward, conduct
absporto -- - tr. - 1 - emporter, transporter [d'un endroit à un autre]. 2 - emmener [par bateau].
disporto -- tr., colporter??
perporto -- to carry, transport
deporto -- to carry down, carry off, take away
exporto -- to carry out, bring out, convey away, send away, export
reporto -- to bear back, bring again, carry back
importo -- to bring in, introduce, bring from abroad, import
apporto -- to carry, convey, bring along:
opporto -- to bring
oporteo -- it is right/proper/necessary; it is becoming; it behooves; ought#
__spir
a breathing, breath
conspiratus -- conspiring, agreeing, in conspiracy, in concert
conspirati -- the conspirators
respiratus -- an inhalation, inspiration
__tine=tene
continentia -- a restraint, abstemiousness, continence, temperance, moderation
abstinentia -- abstinence, starvation, Self-restraint, integrity, in the case of Papinius
obtinentia -- a holding fast, possession
retinentia -- a retaining in the memory, recollection
__dialectic
dialecticus -- dialectical, logical; reasoning (creatures); (dialectical method of Academy);
dialectica -- dialectics, logic
__nunt
to announce, declare, report, relate, narrate, make known, inform, give intelligence of, is the first to bring word?, bring good news, on hearing this, when the news came, To give orders, carry commands, direct % announcing, bringing word (of occurrence); giving warning; prognosticatory; % a female messenger, she that brings tidings, the eagle % message, nouvelle.
internuntius -- a mediator, messenger, gobetween
internuntia -- a mediator, messenger
internuntio -- to exchange messages, negotiate
internuntium -- a medium, means
praenuntia -- a harbinger, foreteller
praenuntio -- to announce beforehand, foretell, predict
praenuntium -- a harbinger, token, omen
pronuntio -- to make publicly known, publish, proclaim, announce
connuntio -- annoncer ensemble ou avec
pernuntio -- to announce
adnuntio -- to announce, make known.
adnuntius -- that announces, makes known
adnuntia -- celle qui annonce.
denuntio -- to announce, declare, denounce, menace, threaten, intimate, order, command
renuntio -- report, announce; reject;
renuntius -- one who brings back intelligence, a reporter
annuntio -- to announce, make known, relate, proclaim
obnuntio -- to tell, report, announce (of bad news)
__mini=memin
comminiscor -- to devise, invent, contrive, To devise falsely, contrive, invent, feign
reminiscor -- to recall to mind, recollect, remember
__actuar
actuariola -- a row-boat, barge
actuariolum -- a small, swift vessel impelled by oars, row-boat, barge
__haer
adhaerentia -- adhérence.
cohaerentia -- a coherence, connection
__lustr
ambilustrum -- ambilustre [nom d'un sacrifice]
ambilustrium -- ambilustre (sacrifice qu'on faisait après une revue).
__oliment#
amolimentum -- Gloss. amulette.
emolimentum -- derate
__mall
amphimallium -- étoffe dont les deux côtés sont laineux
amphimallum -- woollen cloth, which was hairy, shaggy on both sides
__fract=frang
a machine for crushing flint-stones
anfractarius -- qui fait des tours et des détours, qui prend des biais
effractarius -- a house-breaker, burglar
__mitt
to let go, put forth, let hang down, let grow
ap.pro.mitto -- to promise besides, join in a promise.
re.pro.mitto -- to promise in return, to engage, bind one's self
__laps
astrolapsus -- astrolabe
astrolapsum -- astrolabe
__toll
attollentia -- orgueil
extollentia -- pride
__cid=caed
circumcido -- to cut around, cut, clip, trim, to cut off, diminish, abridge, circumscribe, get rid of, abolish
transcido -- to cut through, flog soundly
/intercido -- to fall between, To occur meanwhile, happen, to fall to the ground, perish, To drop out, be lost, be forgotten, escapes you
praecido -- to cut off in front, cut off, cut the cables.&mdash;To cut through, cut up, disable, to cut short, abridge, break off, finish abruptly, briefly, cut it short.&mdash;To break off suddenly, cut off, end, destroy, To deny flatly, refuse, decline
abscido -- to cut off, hew off, to cut off, separate, divide, To cut off, take away violently, because I had broken off abruptly
discidium -- a parting, separation, disagreement, dissension, discord, divorce
discido -- to cut in pieces
/reccido -- to fall/sink back, lapse/relapse/revert; to fall to earth; to come to naught; to rebound
concido -- to cut up, cut through, cut to pieces, ruin, destroy, to break up mounds, to cut to pieces, cut down, destroy, kill, To cut up, beat severely, cudgel soundly, to divide minutely, make fragmentary, To strike down, prostrate, ruin, destroy, annul, to confute
/procido -- to fall forward, fall down, fall prostrate
percido -- to beat, cut to pieces, to smash.
succidia -- a leg of pork, flitch of bacon, their second flitch#
/succido -- to fall under
abcido -- a false spelling for abscīdō.
/accido -- to fall upon, fall to, reach by falling, to arrive, come, had come unexpectedly, that his attack might be a surprise, and more formidable, to fall before, fall at the feet, to strike, reach, come, reach, to come to the ears, come, be heard, be raised, To befit, become, suit, was true of you, to come to pass, happen, occur, fall out, take place, befall, the fate of the conquered, if any calamity occur, thus it happened, that, or, if anything should happen to one, die, if C&oelig;sar should put him to death, if the Romans are destroyed, To end, result, turn out, disappoint us
/decido -- to fall down, fall off, fall away, To fall down dead, sink down, die, passed to that bourne, to fall, drop, fall away, fail, sink, perish, out of, affections
/excido -- to fall out, drop down, fall away, from my hand, to slip out, fell out, to fall out, fall away, slip out, escape, sinks, To pass away, be lost, perish, disappear, be forgotten, I had forgotten, I forgot, to be deprived of, lose, miss, forfeit, fail to obtain
excidium -- overthrow, demolition, subversion, ruin, destruction
/incido -- to fall in, fall, light, strike, reach, find the way, happens into a net, rushing at, fall into, sink under, To light upon, meet, come upon, fall in with, To fall upon, attack, assault, to fall into, incur, contract, become involved, To fall upon, befall, strike, affect, visit, occur, to fall, light, be led, to come, occur, be presented, be recalled, arise, To fall out, happen, occur, break out, your term.&mdash;To fall in with, coincide, agree with
recido -- to cut away, cut down, cut off, empty cells, hew out, to lop off, cut short, retrench, abridge, diminish
occido -- to strike down, knock down, To cut down, cut off, kill, slay, annihilated, to the last man, murder, form of murder, murders were committed, commit suicide, to plague to death, torture, torment, pester, To ruin, undo
occidium -- destruction, ruin
__cid=cad
/circumcido -- to cut around, cut, clip, trim, to cut off, diminish, abridge, circumscribe, get rid of, abolish
/transcido -- to cut through, flog soundly
intercido -- to fall between, To occur meanwhile, happen, to fall to the ground, perish, To drop out, be lost, be forgotten, escapes you
/praecido -- to cut off in front, cut off, cut the cables.&mdash;To cut through, cut up, disable, to cut short, abridge, break off, finish abruptly, briefly, cut it short.&mdash;To break off suddenly, cut off, end, destroy, To deny flatly, refuse, decline
/abscido -- to cut off, hew off, to cut off, separate, divide, To cut off, take away violently, because I had broken off abruptly
/discidium -- a parting, separation, disagreement, dissension, discord, divorce
/discido -- to cut in pieces
reccido -- to fall/sink back, lapse/relapse/revert; to fall to earth; to come to naught; to rebound
/concido -- to cut up, cut through, cut to pieces, ruin, destroy, to break up mounds, to cut to pieces, cut down, destroy, kill, To cut up, beat severely, cudgel soundly, to divide minutely, make fragmentary, To strike down, prostrate, ruin, destroy, annul, to confute
procido -- to fall forward, fall down, fall prostrate
/percido -- to beat, cut to pieces, to smash.
/succidia -- a leg of pork, flitch of bacon, their second flitch#
succido -- to fall under
/abcido -- a false spelling for abscīdō.
accido -- to fall upon, fall to, reach by falling, to arrive, come, had come unexpectedly, that his attack might be a surprise, and more formidable, to fall before, fall at the feet, to strike, reach, come, reach, to come to the ears, come, be heard, be raised, To befit, become, suit, was true of you, to come to pass, happen, occur, fall out, take place, befall, the fate of the conquered, if any calamity occur, thus it happened, that, or, if anything should happen to one, die, if C&oelig;sar should put him to death, if the Romans are destroyed, To end, result, turn out, disappoint us
decido -- to fall down, fall off, fall away, To fall down dead, sink down, die, passed to that bourne, to fall, drop, fall away, fail, sink, perish, out of, affections
excido -- to fall out, drop down, fall away, from my hand, to slip out, fell out, to fall out, fall away, slip out, escape, sinks, To pass away, be lost, perish, disappear, be forgotten, I had forgotten, I forgot, to be deprived of, lose, miss, forfeit, fail to obtain
excidium -- overthrow, demolition, subversion, ruin, destruction
incido -- to fall in, fall, light, strike, reach, find the way, happens into a net, rushing at, fall into, sink under, To light upon, meet, come upon, fall in with, To fall upon, attack, assault, to fall into, incur, contract, become involved, To fall upon, befall, strike, affect, visit, occur, to fall, light, be led, to come, occur, be presented, be recalled, arise, To fall out, happen, occur, break out, your term.&mdash;To fall in with, coincide, agree with
/recido -- to cut away, cut down, cut off, empty cells, hew out, to lop off, cut short, retrench, abridge, diminish
/occido -- to strike down, knock down, To cut down, cut off, kill, slay, annihilated, to the last man, murder, form of murder, murders were committed, commit suicide, to plague to death, torture, torment, pester, To ruin, undo
/occidium -- destruction, ruin
__suc
sucidia -- - 1 - quartier de porc salé, quartier de porc fumé, quartier de viande. - 2 - ressource, réserve. - 3 - sacrifice, immolation.
sucido -- to make fresh, juicy
__cid
acido -- - intr. - devenir acide.#
__err
N
circumerro -- to wander round, stroll about, to pass through
intererro -- to wander between, among, to come, go, be between
pererro -- to wander through, roam over
suberro -- to wander about under
aberro -- to wander out of the way, lose the way, go astray:
inerro -- to wander, err*
oberro -- to wander among, ramble about
aderro -- to wander to., dat.
coerro -- to go, wander about together
deerro -- to wander away, go astray, lose the way*
exerro -- to wander away
__fig
to fix, fasten, drive, thrust in, attach, affix, post, erect, set up, erected, build, set, fix on spits, injects, plants, to fix his abode, fixes, To pierce through, transfix, pierce, to fix, fasten, direct, set, take to heart, To sting, taunt, rally
circumfigo -- to fix, fasten round
transfigo -- to pierce through, transpierce, transfix
1500
superfigo -- to fasten up, fasten thereupon
praefigo -- to fasten before, set up in front, affix
configo -- to join, fasten together:
suffigo -- to fasten beneath, attach, affix, crucified
perfigo -- to pierce through, transfix
defigo -- to fasten, fix, set, drive, set up, plant
effigies -- a copy, imitation, counterpart, likeness, semblance, effigy, his mere effigy.&mdash;An image, statue, figure, an image, ideal, symbol, expression, the image, symbol
effigia -- c. effigies.#
effigio -- to form, fashion, portray
infigo -- to fasten, implant, drive in, affix
refigo -- to unfix, unfasten, unloose, tear down, pull out, take off
adfigo -- to fasten, attach, affix, annex:
offigo -- to drive in, fasten
__gel
to freeze, congeal, stiffened % to turn to ice, to freeze % - intr. - geler. % v. gelu. % 
circumgelo -- to freeze all around
congelasco -- to freeze, congeal
congelesco -- - intr. - Cass. c. congelasco.
congelo -- to freeze together, congeal:
angelus -- angel; messenger;#
angela -- ange du sexe féminin#
regelo -- to thaw, warm
egelo -- to take off the chill, make lukewarm
__gyr
to go around/about (thing); to turn/wheel around/in a circle; % a circle, circular course, round, ring
circumgyro -- int., tourner autour
congyro -- to make a circle about a person
adgyro -- - intr. - tourner autour.
regyro -- to turn about again, to wheel round;
degyro -- détourner, ou se détourner
__lig=leg
superligo -- - tr. - lier au-dessus.
__lig
to tie, bind, bind together, bind up, bandage, bind fast, bandage, is harnessed, in bonds, enwind, connects, to bind up, bind together, unite, conclude
circumligo -- to bind to, fasten around:
interligo -- to bind together
praeligo -- to bind on before, bind to
colligo -- to bind/tie/pack together/up, connect, unite/unify; to fetter/bind; to immobilize, stop;
colliga -- a place for gathering nitrum#
perligo -- c. perlego.
subligo -- to bind below, bind on, fasten
diligo -- to single out, value, esteem, prize, love, fortune's favorite, To love, approve, aspire to, be content with, esteem, appreciate
obligo -- to bind up, bandage, swathe
deligo -- to bind together, tie up, bind fast, fetter, make fast
religo -- to bind back, fasten up, bind fast
adligo -- to bind to, tie to:
illigo -- to bind, fasten, tie up;
__lig2
seligo -- to single out, separate, choose out, cull, select, judges selected by the praetor#
eligo -- to pluck out, root out, to root out, To pick out, choose, elect, select, single out, have a preference for, from many authors, makes a true selection
__lin
a linen thread, string, line, plumb-line, perpendicularly, in horizontal courses, vertically.&mdash;A line, mark, bound, limit, goal, to see the loved one at a distance, the boundary of the seats, to pass the mark % flax, A thread, the fastening, A fishingline, A linen cloth, linen, strained through linen, A rope, cable, A net, hunter's net, toils, a fisher's net, the fisherman % to reduce to a straight line, to make straight, perpendicular % ance % to daub, besmear, anoint, spread, rub over, sealed with pitch, that deserve erasure, adorned at regular intervals, To bedaub, bemire, degrade % - tr. - aligner.
circumlinio -- c. circumlino.
circumlino -- to smear, stick, or spread all over, to besmear
subterlino -- to anoint underneath
interlino -- to smear between, spread between, join with
superlinio -- - tr. - étendre comme enduit sur (qqch).
superlino -- to daub, smear over
praelino -- to smear, daub in front, to plaster over
perlinio -- to smear all over
perlino -- to smear all over
collino -- to besmear, to cover over, defile, pollute
sublino -- to besmear, anoint beneath, to lay on as a groundcolor, to prime with
sublinio -- c. sublino.
delino -- to rub off, remove
oblino -- to daub, smear over, bedaub, besmear
oblinio -- to bedaub, besmear
adlino -- to besmear:
adlinio -- c. adlino.
illino -- to smear over; to anoint;
illinio -- c. illino.
colina -- a kitchen#
relino -- to unseal, open#
relinio -- tr., enduire#
selinum -- renoncule#
elino -- to bedaub, defile, to cleanse completely
__lin=lini
delineo -- to sketch out, to delineate
collineo -- to direct something in a straight line, to aim
__lini=lineo
delinio -- to sketch out, to delineate
conlinio -- - 1 - tr. - diriger en visant, viser. - 2 - intr. - viser juste, atteindre le but, tirer droit.
__coll
collina -- hilly land
__loqu
to speak, talk, say, tell, mention, utter, before, before him, mention, to contradict oneself, To talk of, speak about, have ever on the lips, subj., they say, it is said, they talk of, the talk is of, to speak, declare, show, indicate, express clearly, as is usually said, has written upon it, To rustle, murmur
circumloquor -- to make use of circumlocution, periphrasis
interloquor -- to interrupt in speaking
transloquor -- to talk over, recount
maleloquor -- dire du du mal (de qqn, alicui), injurier (qqn, alicui).
praeloquor -- I. To speak beforehand or first, to speak before another, to forestall in speaking II. To say beforehand
colloquor -- to talk/speak to/with; to talk together/over; to converse; to discuss; to confer, parley
proloquor -- to speak out, utter, express, declare, announce
traloquor -- to talk over, recount
obloquor -- to speak against, interrupt, contradict, rail at, abuse
adloquor -- to speak to, address, salute, greet:
deloquor -- c. loquor.
eloquor -- to speak out, speak plainly, utter, pronounce, declare, state, express
__luu
circumluuium -- the accumulation of land by alluvion around a piece of land, alluvial land
interluuies -- water that flows between, a strait
colluuies -- muck, decayed matter; refuse/sewage; pig-swill; filth; dregs; cesspool/mire;
colluuium -- a conflux, collection of filth, washings, sweepings, draff, swill.
proluuies -- an overflow, inundation, Refuse, filth
proluuium -- an overflow;, an excess, abundance
subluuies -- filth, dirt
subluuium -- M.-Emp. suppuration.
diluuium -- an inundation, flood, deluge, desolation, destruction
diluuies -- an inundation, flood, deluge
diluuio -- to inundate. to deluge
alluuies -- inundation, flood; overflow; superabundance;
inluuies -- an overflow, inundation, in the mud, A wash, offscouring, dirt, filth, uncleanness
abluuium -- a flood, deluge
adluuium -- alluvion.
obluuium -- die Überspülung
eluuies -- an overflow, inundation, A washing away, discharge, removal of sewage
1600
__pon
to put down, set down, put, place, set, fix, lay, deposit, pitch, deposit, might set his foot, kneeling, give birth to, to place, post, set, station, fix, To set up, erect, build, To form, fashion, mould, depict, to set, set out, plant, to offer, propose, promise, lay, stake, wager, To put out at interest, loan, invest, To serve, serve up, set forth, To lay aside, take off, put down, lay down, surrender, To lay out, arrange for burial, To lay in the grave, bury, inter, To arrange, deck, set in order, To subdue, calm, allay, quiet, to fall, abate, to cast, fix, to set, place, put, lay, bring, my name is added to the record.&mdash;To put, place, cause to rest, count upon, rests with you.&mdash;To lay out, spend, employ, occupy, consume, To put, place, count, reckon, consider, regard, regard with fear, regarded as doubtful, attach great importance to, be regarded as a fault, To appoint, ordain, make, to be applied, to make, render, pay, consecrate, To lay down as true, state, posit, fix, assume, assert, maintain, allege, agreed, To cite, set forth, refer to, To set forth, represent, describe, To propose, offer, fix upon, set forth, To put away, leave off, dismiss, forego, lay down, surrender, to be closed without abruptness
circumpono -- to set around, place around:
contrapono -- to place opposite, to oppose to
interpono -- to put between, place among, interpose, insert, intersperse
transpono -- to set over, transfer
intropono -- to put in
superpono -- to put, place over, upon, to set up
antepono -- to set before:
postpono -- to put after, esteem less, neglect, disregard
praepono -- to place in front, put upon, affix
dispono -- to place here and there, array, distribute, set in order, arrange, dispose
propono -- to put forth, set forth, lay out, place before, expose to view, display
suppono -- to put below, set under
compono -- to bring together, place together, collect, unite, join, connect, aggregate:
depono -- to lay away, put aside, set down, lay, place, set, deposit
expono -- to put out, set forth, expose, exhibit
repono -- to put back, set back, replace, restore
sepono -- to lay apart, set aside, put by, separate, pick out, select
appono -- to put at, place by, lay beside, set near:
impono -- to place upon, set on, impose, establish, introduce, set, place
oppono -- to set against, set before, place opposite, oppose, held out, present, closed, To set against pledge, wager, mortgage, To expose, lay bare, open, abandon, to set before, bring forward, present, oppose, adduce, allege, intimidate by an armed force, represented to all assemblies as.&mdash;To say in opposition, object, reply, respond, adduce in answer, oppose, To set against, place in comparison*
copona -- cabaretière / une vieille cabaretière / auberge, taverne
__put1 (make clean)
to stink, be rotten/putrid; to smell bad; to rot/decompose (in such a way as to stink); % a well, A pit % to clean, cleanse, trim, prune, to clear up, arrange, settle, adjust, close accounts.&mdash;To reckon, value, estimate, esteem, deem, hold, consider, regard, To judge, suppose, account, consider, suspect, believe, think, imagine, I suppose, that is just the point, To ponder, consider, reflect upon, weigh, To believe in, recognize, believe themselves protected by, find % a well, a cistern % to rot, putrefy, decay, has become soaked with % c. puteus. % to rot, putrefy
circumputo -- to measure all round
interputo -- to prune here and there
postputo -- to regard as secondary, disregard
/praeputio -- to draw out the foreskin*
/praeputium -- the foreskin, prepuce.*
disputo -- to weigh, examine, investigate, treat, discuss, explain
computo -- to sum up, reckon, compute:
/computesco -- - intr. - se putréfier, pourrir, sentir mauvais, puer.
computus -- a computation
perputo -- to trim, prune thoroughly., to set forth plainly, neatly
supputo -- to count up, reckon, compute
amputo -- to cut around, cut away, lop off, prune:
deputo -- to cut off, prune
reputo -- to count over, reckon, calculate, compute
/reputesco -- to become stinking again
imputo -- to reckon, attribute, make account of, charge, ascribe, impute, his son
/exputesco -- to rot, putrefy
exputo -- To lop off, to prune, to crop
opputo -- to prune
__put2 (rot, stink, pūt)
/circumputo -- to measure all round
/interputo -- to prune here and there
/postputo -- to regard as secondary, disregard
/disputo -- to weigh, examine, investigate, treat, discuss, explain
/computo -- to sum up, reckon, compute:
computesco -- - intr. - se putréfier, pourrir, sentir mauvais, puer.
/computus -- a computation
reputesco -- to become stinking again
/imputo -- to reckon, attribute, make account of, charge, ascribe, impute, his son
exputesco -- to rot, putrefy
/exputo -- To lop off, to prune, to crop
/opputo -- to prune
__puti
praeputio -- to draw out the foreskin
praeputium -- the foreskin, prepuce.
__rad
a staff, rod, stakes, a spoke, A geometer's rod, drawing-rod, a shuttle, a kind of olive, a radius, a beam, ray, a glory % to scrape, scratch, shave, rub, smooth, shave off, lacerate, XII Tabb, shaven, peeled, sweep a mosaic pavement, strip, erased, To touch in passing, touch upon, brush, graze, skirt % be mad
circumrado -- to scrape, shave, pare around
interrado -- to scrape here and there
superrado -- - tr. - Plin. racler dessus.??
praerado -- - tr. - raser par-devant, raser auparavant.
corrado -- to scrape together, rake up, for her
subrado -- to scrape below.
surrado -- to scrape below.
derado -- to scrape/rub/smooth off/away (surface of); to graze; to shave/cut off (hair/head);
abrado -- to scrape away, shave off:
adrado -- to scrape, cut short, shave:
dirado -- to scratch slightly
irrado -- To scrape into
erado -- to scrape off, shave
__radi
subradio -- to cause to beam forth, to indicate
surradio -- to cause to beam forth, to indicate
obradio -- to shine forth
diradio -- - tr. - disposer en forme de rayons.
praeradio -- to outshine
irradio -- to illumine, irradiate; to beam forth, cast forth rays
__rod
to gnaw, To eat away, waste away, corrode, consume, to backbite, slander, disparage
circumrodo -- to gnaw around.
praerodo -- to gnaw off, nibble
corrodo -- to gnaw, gnaw to pieces, To wear away
perrodo -- to gnaw, eat through
abrodo -- to gnaw off
adrodo -- to nibble at, gnaw:
derodo -- v. derosus.
obrodo -- to gnaw
erodo -- to gnaw off, away, to consume.
__rot
a wheel, while the wheel hurries forward, A potter's wheel, A wheel for torture, A car, chariot, a wheel, fickleness, in elegiac metre % to turn round, swing round, whirl about, brandish, circling, revolving, to turn, roll, revolve
circumroto -- to turn round in a circle
irroto -- to play, ducks and drakes*
__saeui
to be fierce, be furious, rage, rave, to rage, rave, be furious, be violent, be passionate, to be furious, rage % Comp.
circumsaeuio -- int., se déchaîner autour
persaeuio -- to be furious
desaeuio -- to rave furiously, rage
exsaeuio -- to cease raging
insaeuio -- to fall into a passion
resaeuio -- to rage again, be stirred anew
__stru
to place together, heap up, pile, arrange, to load, to pile up, To make by joining together, build, erect, fabricate, make, form, construct, To set in order, arrange, draw up, to prepare, cause, occasion, devise, contrive, instigate, To order, arrange, dispose, regulate % a furrow, channel, hollow, the flute, med., med. % to furnish with furrows, channels; to hollow out, groove, flute, striate
circumstruo -- to build round about, surround with buildings, part. pass.
superstruo -- to build upon
interstruo -- to join together; to add, med.
praestruo -- to build before, block, stop up, make impassable, make inaccessible
construo -- to heap together, pile up, accumulate
substruo -- to build beneath, underbuild, lay
perstruo -- to build completely, build up
destruo -- to tear down, raze, demolish
exstruo -- to pile, heap up, accumulate
instruo -- to build in, insert
obstruo -- to build against, build up, block, stop up, bar, barricade, make impassable
restruo -- to erect again
costrus -- mouche ressemblant à l'abeille
astrum -- a heavenly body, star, constellation:
astruo -- to build in addition, add to, To add, confer besides
__stro=stern
prostro -- niederstrecken, niederwerfen
__ostr
ostreum -- oyster;
ostrum -- the blood of the seasnail, purple
ostrea -- an oyster, mussel
ostria -- c. ostrea.
ostrya -- ostrye [sorte d'arbre semblable au frêne]#
__teg
to cover, cover over, decked, walk beside, attended, To cover, hide, conceal, To shelter, protect, defend, with a whole skin, to cloak, hide, veil, conceal, keep secret, dissemble, To defend, protect, guard
circumtego -- to cover round about
supertego -- to cover over
praetego -- to protect
1700
contego -- to cover, roof, bury
protego -- to cover before, hide in front, cover over, cover, protect, shelter
pertego -- to cover all over
subtego -- to cover underneath
distegum -- ??
detego -- to uncover, expose, lay bare, unroof
obtego -- to cover over, cover up, protect
attegia -- a hut:*
intego -- to cover over
retego -- to uncover, bare, open
__ter
to rub, rub away, wear away, bruise, grind, bray triturate, to blow upon the flute, tread upon, to rub off, tread out, thresh, during two harvests, To rub smooth, burnish, polish, sharpen, smoothed, turned, To lessen by rubbing, rub away, wear away by use, wear out, to dull, to wear, tread often, visit, frequent, to wear away, use up, pass, spend, waste, kill, To exert greatly, exhaust, wear out, to wear by use, render common, make trite
circumtero -- to crowd around:
contero -- to grind, bruise, pound, wear out
protero -- to tread under foot, trample down, wear away, crush, bruise
distero -- to bruise, grind to pieces.
pertero -- to rub, bruise, pound to pieces
detero -- to rub away, wear away
obtero -- to bruise, crush, crushed by the crowd, to crush, trample, degrade, disgrace, ravage, destroy, degrade
attero -- to rub against, rub away, wear, to trample, fawning, to destroy, waste, impair, injure, exhaust by exactions
extero -- to tread down, crush
retero -- - tr. - frotter, user par le frottement.??
__teru
proteruio -- to be bold, shameless, impudent
__mung
emungo -- to wipe the nose, blow the nose*
__ung
to smear, besmear, anoint % ne
circumungo -- tr., oindre partout
superungo -- to smear, anoint over
praeungo -- to smear, anoint before
perungo -- to besmear, anoint
perunguo -- to besmear, anoint
subungo -- tr., oindre ou frotter légèrement
deungo -- to smear, besmear, anoint (w/ any fat substance)
exungo -- to anoint*
exunguo -- - tr. - oindre.
inungo -- to anoint
inunguo -- to anoint
reungo -- tr., oindre de nouveau
__uad
a shallow place, shallow, shoal, ford, the river bed, try the ford, make a first attempt, a shallow crossing, ford, A body of water, sea, stream, The depths, bottom, touches bottom, is safe % to go, walk, go hastily, proceed rapidly, rush, in advance % to bind over for appearance, P, m.
circumuado -- to attack on every side, encompass, beset:
interuado -- - intr. - venir entre.
superuado -- to go over, climb over, surmount
transuado -- to cross over
praeuado -- to pass before., to be discharged from, rid of
peruado -- to go through, pass through, extend, prevail, spread through
inuado -- to go into, enter
euado -- to go out, come out, go forth
__uad=uador
euador -- int., ne pas comparaître en justice*
conuador -- to bind one to appear in court by giving surely;, cited me to the court of Venus, made an appointment with me
subuades -- sub-sureties, those who give surety for the bail
__uel
to cover, cover up, enfold, wrap, envelop, veil, clothed with sails, wrapped, to encircle, to hide, conceal % that which propels, a sail, make sail, set sail, with might and main, with full sails, in perfect prosperity, impelling power, vigor, energy, with more zeal, A cloth, covering, awning, curtain, veil, hangings, awnings % the Gallic name for the plant
circumuelo -- to veil, envelop, enfold:
praeuelo -- to veil, cover over; to conceal by placing before
conuelo -- to veil, to cover over
subuelo -- to overshadow
reuelo -- to unveil, uncover, lay bare
aduelo -- to veil, wreathe:
deuelo -- to unveil, uncover
obuelo -- to cover over, hide
__lact
collactanea -- soeur de lait.
collactaneus -- a brother, sister nourished at the same breast, a foster-brother, sister, masc., fem.
__lect=lego
collectarius -- a money-changer, banker, cashier
electarium -- a medicament that melts in the mouth, an electuary
__liber
a freedwoman % a freedman, emancipated person
colliberta -- a fellowfreedwoman
collibertus -- a fellowfreedman
__lig
colligentia -- Boet. conclusion, conséquence.*
diligentia -- attentiveness, earnestness, diligence, industry, assiduity, care, faithfulness, regard for.&mdash;Economy, frugality*
__mand
dép., c. manduco % dep.
commanduco -- to chew much, chew to pieces, masticate
commanducor -- to chew much, chew to pieces, masticate
__mastic
to chew % mastic, an odoriferous gum from the mastic-tree
commastico -- to chew
remastico -- wiederkäuen
__miss=mitt
commissura -- a joining together, joint, seam, juncture, commissure*
admissura -- the admitting of a male to a female, med.*
__mors
To bite continually
commorsico -- to bite to pieces
demorsico -- to bite pieces off; to nibble at; to bite off;
__mors
commorsito -- to bite to pieces
demorsito -- to bite off
__murmur
to murmur, mutter, roar % to murmur, mutter; to rustle, rumble, roar
commurmuro -- int., murmurer à part soi ou ensemble
commurmuror -- to murmur in company:
submurmuro -- to murmur a little, in secrēt
admurmuro -- to murmur, murmur at:
admurmuror -- v. admurmuro
demurmuro -- to mutter over
immurmuro -- to murmur at, murmur against
obmurmuro -- to murmur against, at, to
remurmuro -- to murmur back, remurmur
__pac
to agree together, bargain, contract, agree, covenant, stipulate, transact, stipulate for, bind themselves, had been agreed upon, under an agreement, that, To betroth, to barter, hazard, stake
compaciscor -- to make an agreement, form a compact with one, temp. perf., partic.
depaciscor -- isburden??
__para
comparatiua -- words in the comparative degree, comparatives*
comparatiuum -- le comparatif.*
__part
comparturio -- to be associated in childbirth
reparturio -- tr., enfanter à nouveau, [fig.]
__pec=pac
compeciscor -- to make an agreement, form a compact with one, temp. perf., partic.
depeciscor -- to bargain for, agree upon; to make an agreement
__pet
competentia -- a meeting together, agreement
appetentia -- desire, longing
__pet=paen
repetentia -- memory, remembrance
__ple
completorium -- a service containing prayers at the close of the day
suppletorium -- a supplement
__pos=pon
compositura -- a joining together, connection
impostura -- deceit, imposture
__cid=cad
concidentia -- accord ou analogie de la forme*
procidentia -- a falling down, forwards, a procidence, prolapse
accidentia -- that which happens, a casual event, a chance*
__corp
to assume a body, become incarnate % to make, fashion into a body, to furnish with a body. % c. corporasco. % passif de corporo. - 1 - devenir corps. - 2 - perdre la vie, n'être plus qu'un cadavre.
concorporo -- to unite in one body, to incorporate
accorporo -- to incorporate, to fit, join to
1800
incorporo -- To fasten, mark in, upon a body.
recorporo -- to furnish again with a body, to restore the body to, its former condition, med.
__curs=curr
to run about, run hither and thither, to vibrate
concursito -- c. concurso.
decursito -- - tr. - Apul. parcourir.
incursito -- to rush upon, assault, attack
occursito -- to meet
recursito -- fréq. de recurso
__cuss=quat (shake, move about)
concussura -- the extorting of money by threats*
percussura -- a blow, stroke, thrust
succussura -- ??
__dec
comeliness, decency
condecentia -- convenance, bienséance, décence.
indecentia -- unseemliness, impropriety
__diacon
Fort. diaconesse. % Cass. le diaconat. % the office of deacon, deaconship % a servant, minister of the church, a deacon
condiaconus -- diacre avec d'autres
subdiaconus -- a sub - deacon
__fabr
a joiner's shop, smith's shop, workshop, An art, trade, pursuit, industry, craft, Architecture, A skilful production, fabric, structure, a crafty device, wile, trick, stratagem % to make, build, construct, erect, carved, forged % to make, frame, forge, construct, build, To prepare, form, fashion, construct, coin
confabricor -- to compose, make
perfabrico -- to work, use up;, to take in, overreach, cheat
refabrico -- to build again, rebuild
__flat=flo
conflatorium -- a melting. furnace
sufflatorium -- the bellows
__forn
voûter. % to commit whoredom, fornication
confornico -- to over-arch, vault over
exfornicor -- c. fornicor
__frag
confragosum -- a rough place, region
confragosa -- raboteux, inégal / embarrassant
__glom
to wind into a ball, gather up, roll together, collect, make the horse prance, To gather together, make a knot of, collect, crowd, assemble, To make by gathering, collect, make up, produce, to roll up, gather, accumulate
conglomero -- to roll together, wind up, conglomerate
agglomero -- to wind on, add by winding:
inglomero -- to heap together, accumulate
__glut
glue, paste; gum; adhesive; solder (Douay); connecting tie/band/bond (L+S); % c. glutinum. % to glue, glue together.
conglutino -- to join together, unite, cement:
disglutino -- to disjoin, disunite, no.
adglutino -- to glue, paste, solder, cement to, to fit closely to, to fasten to.
deglutino -- to unglue, to separate by moistening
inglutino -- coller à, unir à.
reglutino -- to unglue, unloose*
__gru
congruentia -- agreement, harmony, congruity, symmetry
ingruentia -- approche, imminence.*
__sarc
a package, bundle, burden, load, pack, packs, luggage, baggage, burden, brings forth, a burden, weight, sorrow, care % raccommoder [des hardes]
consarcino -- to sew, stitch, patch together
subsarcino -- to repair, heal
__seru
young servant girl; % young slave;
conseruula -- a small (female) fellow-slave
conseruulus -- compagnon d'esclavage.
__son
consonantia -- an agreement, harmony, consonance
dissonantia -- dissonance, discrepancy
resonantia -- an echo
__splend
to shine, be bright, gleam, glitter, glisten % to become bright, begin to shine, derive lustre
consplendesco -- to shine very much
desplendesco -- to cease to shine, to lose its brightness
exsplendesco -- to shine forth, be distinguished
resplendeo -- to shine back, glitter, be resplendent
resplendesco -- c. resplendeo
insplendesco -- to shine into, illuminate
__stabil
to make firm, confirm, stay, support, to establish, fix, confirm, make secure
constabilio -- to confirm, establish, make firm
instabilio -- to fortify
__susurr
a humming, murmuring, muttering, whispering, Whispers % Hier. médisance. % to hum, buzz, murmur, mutter, whisper
consusurro -- to whisper together
insusurro -- to whisper to, insinuate, suggest
__temp
to observe proper measure, be moderate, restrain oneself, forbear, abstain, be temperate, act temperately, to keep from looking, refrain from tears, refrain, they with difficulty refrained, To forbear, abstain, refrain, spare, be indulgent, To divide duly, mingle in due proportion, combine suitably, compound properly, qualify, temper, to mix, fill, warm, water, To rule, regulate, govern, manage, arrange, order, to string, facilitated, to regulate, rule, control, govern, sway, moderate, soothe % a due mingling, proper mixture, tempering, temperature, temper, a moderate temperature % 
contempero -- to moderate, temper by mixing
distempero -- mélanger, délayer / mal répartir
intemperies -- want of moderation, irregularity, excess, inclemency
intemperiae -- intemperateness, inclemency.
obtempero -- to comply, attend, conform, submit, obey
attemperies -- action de modérer.
attempero -- to fit, adjust, accommodate
extempero -- - tr. - Apic. accomoder convenablement.
retempero -- - tr. - Th.-Prisc. tempérer, modérer.
__temp1
contemporo -- to be at the same time, to be contemporary
detemporo -- tr., saigner [un animal] aux tempes (cf. depectoro)
__tenebr
darkness, gloom % to grow, become dark % to make dark, to darken % darkness % to grow, become dark
contenebrasco -- to become, grow very dark
contenebresco -- to grow dark
contenebro -- to make very dark, to darken
intenebro -- c. intenebrico
obtenebresco -- to become, grow dark
obtenebro -- to make dark, to darken
__terebr
to bore, bore through, perforate % neutr.
conterebro -- to pierce, bore through
perterebro -- to bore through
exterebro -- to extract by boring, bore out
__trib
contribulo -- to crush, bruise
attribulo -- to press hard, to thresh
__uent=ueni
conuenticium -- jeton de présence, argent donné à ceux qui assistent à l'assemblée du peuple chez les Grecs
aduenticia -- bienvenue
__uenust
to make lovely, beautify % c. cynocephalia
conuenusto -- to ornament, adorn
deuenusto -- to disfigure, deform
euenusto -- unschöner machen
__uisc
conuiscero -- to incorporate, unite
inuiscero -- to put into the entrails
euiscero -- to deprive of entrails, disembowel, eviscerate, mangle
__uolu
conuoluulus -- A caterpillar that wraps itself up in a leaf
inuoluulus -- a worm, caterpillar that wraps itself up in leaves
__corp
corpulentia -- corpulence, grossness, fleshiness of body
corpulento -- tr., réunir en un corps solide / oeuvre non identifiée / Solution universitaire (Jean-Yves Guillaumin, qui a traduit du Boèce pour Budé) / C'est un passage du De unitate et uno ﻿de Boèce, qui est édité dans la Patrologie Latine de Migne, volume 63, page 1077, colonne C
__rect=reg
Uprightness
correctura -- the office of a
directura -- a making straight, even, a levelling
__charmid
joie]
decharmido -- to un-Charmidize
recharmido -- to cease to be Charmides, to decharmidize one's self, as you have been Charmidized, recharmidize yourself, as you have put on the character of Charmides, lay it aside again
__sip=sap
desipientia -- want of understanding, foolishness
insipientia -- unwisdom, folly
__diacatoch
diacatochia -- possession
diacatochus -- a possessor
__diaet
diaetetica -- - 1 - la diététique. - 2 - la médecine.
diaetetici -- physicians who cure by diet
__cut
to strike through and through, thrust through, pierce, transfix, the right place, To strike hard, beat, hit, smite, shoot, had been struck, struck by lightning, play, poorly woven, To slay, kill, behead, to smite, strike, visit, overwhelm, ruin, To strike, shock, impress, affect deeply, move, astound, it impressed me, To cheat, deceive, impose upon
dis.per.cutio -- to dash out
repercutio -- to strike back, drive back; only late in act, P. pass., thrown back, rebounding
__sid=sede
dissidentia -- diversity, contrariety
subsidentia -- a sinking down, subsidence;, a settling, sediment, med.
__sigill
small statues, statuettes, little images, figures, woven in, A seal % empreindre / marquer du signe de la croix = chasser par le signe... % - 1 - figurine, statuette. - 2 - empreinte d'un cachet, cachet, sceau. - 3 - signe.
dissigillo -- enlever les sigilla
1900
obsigillo -- - tr. - sceller, cacheter.
__eleemosyn
eleemosyna -- alms
eleemosynae -- aumône, aumônes
__hered
to inherit, med.
exheredito -- to disinherit
inheredito -- to appoint an heir
__pia=pio
atoning sacrifice;
expiamentum -- moyen expiatoire.
impiamentum -- contamination, defilement
__meat
a going, passing, motion, course, A way, path, passage, by six channels
extrameatus -- action de sortir, sortie.
intrameatus -- a going between, within
intromeatus -- a going between, within
commeatus -- a going to and fro, passing back and forth, in two trips, A leave of absence, furlough, to be on furlough, A train, convoy, supply - train, Provisions, supplies, stores, a market, supplies of war, baggage
remeatus -- a return
__audi
a hearing, attention, commands
inaudientia -- disobedience
obaudientia -- obedience
__aest
to rage, burn, To be warm, be hot, burn, glow, to rise in waves, surge, seethes, smokes, To undulate, swell, be tossed, heave, to burn, be excited, be inflamed, for her, To waver, vacillate, hesitate, be in doubt % an agitation, glow, heat, rage of fire, in midday heat, fever, summer, a heaving, swell, surge, boil up, breakers, The waves, billows, sea, tides, at low tide, tides of passion, Irresolution, uncertainty, hesitation % Hitze empfinden - in sorglicher Unruhe sein
interaestuo -- to bubble up, at intervals, to be restless*
abaestuo -- to hang down richly#
adaestuo -- to rush, to roar, boiling up
exaestuo -- to boil up, foam up, ferment
inaestuo -- to boil in, rage within
__cuss=quat
intercussus -- a striking between
succussus -- a shaking, jolting
succusso -- to shake, jerk up and down, to jolt
decusso -- to divide crosswise, decussate
excusso -- to excuse*
incussa -- bruised, injured parts
__frige
to be cold, be chilly, freeze, of the dead, to be inactive, be lifeless, be languid, flag, droop, halts, To be coldly received, be coldly treated, be slighted, be disregarded, remained unnoticed, were of no effect % to grow cold, be chilled % -I. to squeak, squeal -II. to erect
interfrigesco -- to grow old, die away, be dropped in the meanwhile
perfrigeo -- to take cold
perfrigesco -- to be chilled, catch cold
defrigesco -- to cool off, grow cold
effrigo -- tr., bien rôtir#
infrigesco -- to become cold
refrigesco -- to grow cold, be chilled
__iung
to join together, unite, connect, attach, fasten, yoke, harness, shut, exchange, clasp, span, bridge, connect the bulwarks by bridges, To harness, yoke, attach, in pairs, to the car, P. pass., adjoining, continuous with, to join, unite, To add, give in addition, To make by joining, built with, To bring together, join, unite, to join, unite, bring together, associate, attach, ally, make an alliance with, give in marriage, marry, To make by joining, enter into, to join, unite, make by joining, compound, compose
interiungo -- to join together, clasp
superiungo -- to subjoin, add
transiungo -- to harness differently, to tackle in elsewhere
coniungo -- to fasten together, connect, join, unite, gather:
disiungo -- to unyoke; to disunite, sever, divide, separate, part, estrange; to put asunder (Ecc);
subiungo -- to fasten under, annex, attach
adiungo -- to fasten on, join to, harness:
diiungo -- to unyoke; to disunite, sever, divide, separate, part, estrange; to put asunder (Ecc);
iniungo -- to join, fasten, attach
abiungo -- to unyoke, loose from harness:
deiungo -- to unyoke
seiungo -- to disunite, disjoin, part, sever, separate, divide
__mund1
toilet ornament, decoration, dress (of women) % to make clean, to clean, cleanse % in readiness
intermundia -- spaces between worlds
intermundium -- intermonde, espace entre les mondes.
__mund2
commundo -- to cleanse, purify wholly
permundo -- to cleanse thoroughly
immundae -- unclean women, Comp., Sup.*
immundo -- to defile, render unclean
remundo -- to cleanse again
__nasc
to be born, begin life, be produced, proceed, be begotten, since men have lived, son of a goddess, To rise, begin, be produced, derive origin, spring forth, start, proceed, grow, be found, is found, rise, rose, to arise, spring forth, proceed, be produced, hence it follows that % c. nascor.
internascor -- to grow between, spring up in the way
supernascor -- int., croître en sus
praenascor -- naître auparavant.
connascor -- to be born at the same time, to be born with
subnascor -- to grow up under, spring up afterwards
denascor -- to perish, die
innascor -- to be born in, grow upon, spring up in
renascor -- to be born again, grow again
__nosc=gnos
to get knowledge of, become acquainted with, come to know, learn, discern, by any one, by the army, learn, to have become acquainted with, have learned, know, understand, know them well, you know me, I think, To examine, consider, To know, recognize, To acknowledge, allow, admit
internosco -- to know apart, distinguish, discern
praenosco -- to learn beforehand, foreknow
pernosco -- to examine thoroughly
dinosco -- to know apart, distinguish, discern
adnosco -- - tr. - 1 - connaître (par les sens, par l'esprit), voir, concevoir, comprendre, saisir, apprendre. 2 - reconnaître (qqn, qqch déjà vu, déjà connu). 3 - reconnaître, avouer, admettre, confesser.
renosco -- to recognize
__prim
the first part, the beginning, the first principles, elements, from the beginning, at first, in front, before, in the beginning, first
interprimo -- to press, squeeze to pieces, to crush
supprimo -- to sink, send to the bottom, To keep back, withhold, To hold back, keep back, check, stop, detain, restrain, let fall, to conceal, suppress, To check, repress
comprimo -- to press together, bring together, compress, close:
perprimo -- to press hard, press perpetually, lie upon
deprimo -- to press down, weigh down, sink down, depress, To sink, to press down, depress, overwhelm, to silence, To depreciate, disparage
exprimo -- to press out, force out, squeeze forth, had carried up, protruding, To form by pressure, form, model, portray, exhibit, to wring out, extort, wrest, elicit, constrained.&mdash;To imitate, copy, represent, portray, describe, express, may resemble, To render, translate, To pronounce, articulate
reprimo -- to press back, keep back, check, curb, restrain, hem in, driven back, to check, curb, restrain, limit, confine, repress, suppressed, refrain, will control myself
adprimo -- to press on/to; to clench (the teeth);
imprimo -- to press upon, press against, raised herself, To stamp, imprint, impress, mark, plant, drawn.&mdash;To engrave, stamp, mark, sealed, takes impressions, embossed scene of crime, to impress, engrave, stamp, mark, To stamp, mark
opprimo -- to press against, press together, press down, close, shut your mouth!, close, repress, weighed down, be crushed, sink, covered, overwhelm, to press upon, weigh down, burden, overwhelm, he prosecuted urgently, resistlessly, To put down, suppress, quell, check, quash, baffled, multered, subvert, overthrow, quash, To overthrow, overwhelm, crush, overpower, prostrate, subdue, from the conquest of Carthage, To fall upon, surprise, seize, catch, occupy, betrayed, To hide, conceal, suppress
__regn
to have royal power, be king, rule, reign, ruled by, in which Saturn was king, have kings, To be lord, rule, reign, govern, be swpreme, To lord it, tyranniz&lt;*&gt; domineer, to rule, have the mastery, prevail, predominate % kingly government, royal authority, kingship, royalty, Dominion, sovereignty, rule, authority, supreme power, the presidency of the revels, Despotism, tyranny, personal sovereignty, arbitrary rule, A kingdom, state governed by a king, rule, authority, power, influence, A territory, estate, possession, your own estate, fields, these realms
interregnum -- an interval between two reigns, interregnum
corregno -- to reign, together with one
__spat
a space, room, extent, A space, distance, interval, length, the distance, Size, bulk, extent, very large, lengthens out, A walking, walk, promenade, turn, course, A space for recreation, walk, promenade, public place, square, in levels, A prescribed path, race-course, track, the interior, a path, course, race, track, A portion of time, space, interval, period, the length, of the same metrical length, Space, time, leisure, opportunity % - intr. - errer, circuler. % to spread abroad, spread out, expand, spreading wings, To go about, take a walk, walk about, promenade, To walk, march along, stride, go, proceed
interspatium -- the interval
conspatior -- zusammen spazieren
exspatior -- to wander from the way, spread, extend
inspatior -- to walk about in
__tign
building-materials, a piece of timber, trunk of a tree, log, stick, post, beam
intertignium -- the interval, space between two beams
contigno -- to join with beams, furnish with joists
contignum -- a structure of beams;, a piece of flesh with seven ribs
! from here on I fix definitions directly into the sheet
__turb
a turmoil, hubbub, uproar, disorder, tumult, commotion, disturbance, A brawl, disturbance, quarrel, A disorderly multitude, crowd, throng, mob, band, train, troop, A great number, throng, multitude, my brood, The common crowd, vulgar, mass % to make an uproar, move confusedly, be in disorder, rages, To disturb, a&lt;*&gt;itate, confound, disorder, throw into confusion, to throw into disorder, break, disorganize, to trouble, make thick, turbid, to make confusion, cause disorder, derange all his affairs, there is confusion, To confound, confuse, disturb, unsettle
interturbo -- to make disturbance;;
conturbo -- to confuse, disturb, derange, disorder, confound
disturbo -- to drive asunder, separate by violence, throw into disorder, disturb
perturbo -- to confuse, disturb, confound, throw into disorder*
proturbo -- to drive on, drive away, repel, repulse
deturbo -- to thrust down, beat down, expel, overthrow, tear down, hurl, strike down
exturbo -- to drive out, thrust out, drive away, thrust away
obturbo -- to make turbid, disorder, confuse, trouble, disturb
__trud
to thrust, push, shove, crowd forward, press on, drive, impel, to push forth, put forth, send forth, to push, thrust forward, drive, presses hard upon, puts forward
introtrudo -- to thrust in
intertrudo -- to thrust between
abstrudo -- to thrust away, push into concealment, hide, conceal:
contrudo -- to thrust, crowd together
protrudo -- to thrust forward, push out
detrudo -- to thrust away, thrust down, push down, push off, strip off
extrudo -- to thrust out, push forth, drive out, drive away
intrudo -- to thrust in, force in
2000
obtrudo -- to thrust upon, obtrude
retrudo -- to thrust back,;;
__seru
obseruantia -- attention, respect, regard, reverence
obseruanties -- c. observantia
__stet=sto
obstetricia -- midwifery, obstetrics*
obstetrico -- to perform the office of a midwife*
obstetricor -- c. obstetrico.
__strag
a spread, covering, bed-spread
obstragulum -- a strap, lace, latchet
stragulum -- a spread, covering, bed-spread
__trect=trah
obtrectatus -- detraction, disparagement*
attrectatus -- part. passé de attrecto; touché, manié.
__aestim
to determine the value of, estimate, value, rate, appraise: % Fest. estimation. % Fest. estimation.
peraestimo -- to esteem greatly
coaestimo -- to estimate together with
exaestimo -- - tr. - 1 - estimer. - 2 - considérer comme. - 3 - peser, juger, apprécier, croire (qqch). - 4 - intr. : avoir une opinion, penser, juger, croire.
__frig
to cool, refresh with coolness
perfrigero -- to make cold, to cool off, to let grow cold
refrigero -- to make cool again, cool off, chill, cool
refrigerium -- a cooling;, a mitigation, consolation, med.
__lec
perlecebra -- an enticement, allurement
perlecebrae -- die Verlockung, Verführung
illecebra -- allurement, enticement, means of attraction; incitement; enticement by magic;
illecebro -- to entice
exlecebra -- a female allurer, wheedler, sponger
elecebra -- a female allurer, wheedler, sponger
__mens=met
a measuring, measurement, by the water-clock, A measure, standard of measurement, Measure, extent, girth, size, was too small, fortune, a limit, capacity, power, extent, degree, art worthy of, capacity % to measure % messen
permensuro -- tr., mesurer
remensuro -- - tr. - Grom. remesurer.
__stimul
to goad, rouse, set in motion, stir, spur, incite, stimulate, driven by hunger, excited, To goad, torment, vex, trouble, plague, disquiet, disturb
perstimulo -- to stimulate violently
destimulo -- to goad on, to stimulate
exstimulo -- to goad on, instigate, stimulate
instimulo -- to goad, urge on, stimulate
__uest
peruestigo -- to trace out, search out, hunt down
inuestigo -- to track, trace out, search after
__porc
porcellulus -- tout petit porc.
__oc__
ocellulus -- a little eye
__scaen
In a theatre, the stage, boards, scene
postscaenium -- the part of the theatre behind the scenes, the postscenium;, secret, mystery
proscaenium -- the front part of the stage, proscenium
__cel
to quicken, hasten, accelerate, swift in obeying this order, To make haste, be quick
praecelero -- to hasten before, in advance
adcelero -- to speed up, quicken, hurry; to make haste, act quickly, hasten; to accelerate;
__cog
to consider thoroughly, ponder, weigh, reflect upon, think, to call to mind, To feel, be inclined, be disposed, are friendly to, hostile in disposition. &mdash; To have in mind, intend, meditate, design, plan, purpose, mean, their purposes, plotted for
praecogito -- to ponder beforehand, premeditate
concogito -- tr., avoir dans la pensée
excogito -- to think out, contrive, devise, invent
incogito -- to contrive, design
recogito -- to think over, reconsider
__uid2
to divide, force asunder, part, gave two days to, part, is set in gold, To divide, distribute, apportion, share, appropriated, To break up, scatter, destroy, To separate, divide, part, remove, keeps away, to part, divide, distribute, apportion, arrange, sing by turns, to divide the question, regulated, To separate, distinguish
prae.di.uido -- - tr. - diviser d'avance.
per.di.uido -- - tr. - partager.
in.di.uiduum -- an atom, indivisible particle
__diuin
a prophetess % to foresee, divine, foretell, predict, prophesy, expect, dread, conjecture, prophetic % The deity
praediuino -- to have a presentiment of, to divine beforehand
addiuino -- to divine, to prognosticate
__hono
to honor, respect, adorn, ornament, embellish, decorate, to celebrate, in honor % dép. c. honoro
praehonoro -- - tr. - Hilar. honorer par-dessus tout.
dehonoro -- to dishonor
exhonoro -- to dishonor, despise
inhonoro -- to dishonor
__macer
to make soft, make tender, soften, soak, steep, macerate, To weaken, waste, enervate, To fret, vex, torment, distress, torture, pain, am vexed % to make soft, tender % a wall of soft clay, enclosure, wall % distress, affliction
praemacero -- to soak, steep beforehand
commacero -- to soften by steeping, to macerate
permacero -- to soften thoroughly
__med
praemeditor -- to think over beforehand, consider in advance, premeditate
commeditor -- to impress carefully on one's mind, to practise, imitate
__mon
praemonitum -- avertissement.
admonitus -- a reminding, suggestion, request, sing., Reproof, more violent for the reproof
admonitum -- a reminding, warning
__sid=sede
praesidatus -- the office of governor of a province, governorship
obsidatus -- the condition of a hostage, hostageship
__sid=sidus
to be blasted, palsied by a constellation, to be planet-struck, to be sunstruck
praesidero -- to be in advance of the constellations
considero -- to look at closely, regard attentively, inspect, examine, survey
desiderium -- a longing, ardent desire, wish, want, grief, regret, homesickness, love-potions, Want, need, necessity, A request, petition, a desire, longing*
desidero -- to long for, ask, demand, call for, wish for, desire, require, expect, To miss, lack, feel the want of, am waited for, To lose, to be missing, be lost, be wanting, almost every one*
__sul=sal (might have a connection to salt and payment)
praesulatus -- the office of a superintendent
consulatus -- the office of consul, consulate, consulship, as a candidate, The consul's term of office, consular year, consulate
exsulatus -- banishment, exile
__ag
to put in motion, move, lead, drive, tend, conduct, borne on, to crucify, will carry, whither are you going?, strode in front, if you can't afford an ox, drive an ass. &mdash; Pass., to go, march, march on quicker, to drive away, carry off, steal, rob, plunder, ferre, to rob, plunder, To chase, pursue, hunt, track out from house to house, To move, press, push forward, advance, bring up, pushed forward, to be carried under ground, drive, struck deep root, opens in fissures, beached, to steer, to drive, make way, bringing the welcome hour, To throw out, stir up, shoots up into the air, to expire, exert yourself in gesturing and risk your life, to lead, direct, guide, To move, impel, excite, urge, prompt, induce, rouse, drive, leads astray, blinds, occupies, To pursue for harm, persecute, disturb, vex, attack, assail, To pursue, carry on, think, reflect, deliberate, treat, represent, exhibit, exercise, practise, act, perform, deliver, pronounce, to be idle, in person, a time for action, fought in the van, are busy with, the metre appropriate to dramatic action, what shall we do now?, I know what to do, how are you?, how are you?, what is to become of, what do you mean?, it is of no use, you cannot succeed, or, to give attention to, mind, heed, are you attending?, their purpose and aim, aimed at this, if it was their aim, it was planned, take care, you are not listening, bent on other plans, paid no attention, are otherwise occupied, are indifferent.&mdash;To perform, do, transact, attend to his own business, what they were at, busy with auspices and affairs, carry on, to hold an assize, to preside at, taken, to manage, transact, do, discuss, speak, deliberate, negotiations begun, treat, to address the people on a law or measure, to propose, bring before the people, to treat, discuss, narrate, your subject, during this speech, to plead, prosecute, advocate, go to law, to be argued on other grounds, in a cause relating to, to litigate, sue for, to press an accusation, to plead the cause of mercy, the counsel, to practise law, while I am counsel, the judges, to hear, to prosecute, to accuse of theft. &mdash;Pass., to be in suit, be in question, be at stake, To represent, act, perform, to assume a part, the character of, appear as actors, act the part of, when they have finished acting, to triumph, over, over, keep watch, to be buried in silence, to exercise a conqueror's prerogative, to repent, to forget, to give thanks, thank, to spend, pass, use, live through, celebrate, in my eightyfourth year, was experiencing, going on seven months since, well spent, is past, to live, pass time, be, rejoiced, to treat, deal, confer, talk with, pleads, tried to persuade, to deal well or ill with, treat or use well or ill, impers., to go well or ill with one, be well or badly off, who are well off, if, will be treated, to be at stake, be at hazard, be concerned, be in peril, if his interests were involved, is at risk, to finish, complete, after it is done, past, an accomplished fact, don't waste your efforts, it is all over, all is lost, is lost, behave, because they were careless, come now, well, up, good % a gangway in a ship, agi
praeterago -- to drive by, drive past
circumago -- to drive in a circle, turn round.
retroago -- to drive back, to turn back
perago -- to thrust through, pierce through, transfix
ambages -- a going around, roundabout way, digression, circumlocution, evasion, without circumlocution, A riddle, enigma, dark saying, a dumb show, an enigmatical symbol of
abago -- - tr. - 1 - chasser, renvoyer, éloigner. - 2 - pousser devant soi, emmener, détourner, voler. - 3 - expulser, faire disparaître, dissiper.
adagium -- a proverb, an adage
exagium -- a weighing, weight; a balance
reago -- tr., pousser de nouveau [fig.]
__it=eo
to go % a going away, departure
praeterita -- things gone by, the past. Praeterita 
interitus -- overthrow, fall, ruin, destruction, annihilation, Death
introitus -- a going in, entering, entrance, An entrance, passage, A beginning, introduction, prelude
transitus -- a going over, passing over, passage, A passing over, desertion, a passing over, passing away, a gradual passing, transition
transito -- hindurchgehen
comitium -- a place of assembly, place of meeting, the Ephoreium, a place adjoining the Forum, in which the Comitia curiata were held, the comitium*
comito -- to accompany, attend, follow, P. pass.
comitor -- to join as an attendant, accompany, attend, follow, with, with purses, To attend to the grave, to follow, accompany, attend
comitia -- the Roman people in assembly, comitia curiata, the general assembly of the Roman people, for electing consuls, for electing tribunes of the plebs, An election*
comitiae -- election;;
comitio -- - intr. - convoquer le peuple sur le comitium, aller sur le comitium.
reditus -- a going back, returning, return, home.&mdash;Plur., a return, revolution, circuit, A return, revenue, income, proceeds, yield, profit, a return, restoration
ambitus -- a going round, moving about, revolution, circumlocution, a circuit, circumference, border, a period, a suing for office, canvassing for votes
puritia -- netteté, pureté.
subitum -- a sudden, unexpected thing, a sudden occurrence, whether he spoke after deliberation, off-hand
subitor -- être vivement ému, être surpris.
abitus -- a departure, removal, An outlet, way of exit, passage out
abito -- to go away, depart
amita -- a father's sister#
exitium -- destruction, ruin, hurt, mischief, end, the cause of ruin, destructive power
exitus -- a going out, going forth, egress, departure, A way of egress, outlet, passage, a way out, end, close, conclusion, termination, catastrophe, opportunities. &mdash;End of life, end, death, A means, method, way, device, solution, An issue, result, event, accomplishment, without result, the event justifies the deed
2100
imitor -- to imitate, act like, copy after, seek to resemble, counterfeit, mimic, resembles, To imitate, represent, express, hit off, copy, portray, not expressing by gesticulation, assume the form of, make friable, supply the place of, display*
imito -- c. imitor.*
initium -- a going in, entrance, of the country, a beginning, commencement, was the first to flee, sing. abverb., in the beginning, at first, at first, constituent parts, elements, First principles, elements, Auspices, a new reign, Secret sacred rites, sacred mysteries, instruments used in celebrating the rites
initio -- to begin, initiate, consecrate, admit
inito -- to go into, to enter
aditus -- a going to, drawing near, approach, access, seek to approach, how to approach gently, A privilege of admittance, access, an opportunity of conversing, a way of approach, entrance, avenue, entry, inaccessible, a way of approach, means of reaching
adito -- to go to, approach often, habitet, adbites.
obitus -- an approach, visit, A going down, setting, Downfall, ruin, destruction, death, painful death, ruin
emitesco -- to become mild, mellow
__dei=diu
deito -- tr., déifier
__con1
conitor -- to put forth all one's strength, make an effort, strive, struggle, endeavor, To press upon, press toward, struggle toward, strive to reach, To labor, be in labor, to endeavor, struggle, putting forth her own energy
conitum -- an oblation made by sprinkling flour#
__titul
a superscription, inscription, label, title, ticket, bill, placard, notice, epitaph, at public sale, An honorable appellation, title of honor, glory, name, title, Repute, renown, fame, An alleged cause, pretence, pretext, was a more respectable pretext % to give a title to, to call, name, entitle, med.
praetitulo -- - tr. - intituler (un livre).
attitulo -- to name, entitle
intitulo -- to entitle, give a name to
__trunc
to maim, mutilate, shorten, cut off, strips off the leaves
praetrunco -- to cut off before, in front, to cut off, clip
pertrunco -- 
contrunco -- to cut down, to pieces
distrunco -- to cut to pieces, cut up
detrunco -- to lop, cut off
obtrunco -- to cut down, cut to pieces, kill, slay, slaughter
__uapor
to steam, smoke, fumigate, heat, warm
praeuaporo -- to fumigate, perfume beforehand
peruaporo -- to steam, fill with vapor
exuaporo -- c. evaporo.
euaporo -- to disperse in vapor, to evaporate
__ig=ag
prodigentia -- extravagance, profusion, prodigality*
exigentia -- exigence.*
__mine
prominentia -- a jutting out, projection, prominence, promontories
imminentia -- imminence, nearness
__quir
c. quirito. % v. quirrito.
proquirito -- to cry out, exclaim in public, to publish, proclaim*
requirito -- to ask after, inquire for
__purpur
purpurissum -- masc.
purpurissus -- a kind of dark purple color
__ausp
divination by the flight of birds, augury from birds, auspices, authority to take the auspices, A sign, omen, divine premonition, indication by augury, under better omens, an impulse, command, guidance, authority, of Jupiter himself, Right, power, inclination, will % to take auspices; to seek omens; to begin with auspices, make ceremonial start; to portend; % to take the auspices.
redauspico -- to take the auspices anew;;
exauspico -- to take an augury from
__undant
redundantia -- an overflowing, excess, lavishness
abundantia -- plenty, fullness, abundance, the same as when they were rich.&mdash;Profusion, lavishness
exundantia -- an overflow
__fulg
refulgentia -- a reflected lustre, refulgence
effulgentia -- action de briller
__spons
responsoria -- repetitions in vocal worship, responses
responsorium -- verset??
__grad
a step, pace, gait, walk, at a quick step, at a moderate pace, hasten, charge, A station, position, ground, steps, rounds, stairs, a step, stage, degree, grade, towards my return, An approach, advance, progress, march, form, march.&mdash;A step, degree, grade, stage, rank, interval, notes, intervals, distinction, stages, Self-possession, be disconcerted.&mdash;A position, relation, overthrown % to take steps, step, walk, go, advance
retrogradior -- Plin. rétrograder, reculer.
retrogrado -- to go back, backwards, to retrograde
retrogrador -- rückwärts-, zurückgehen
supergradior -- to step, walk, go over
praegrado -- to go before, precede
degrado -- tr., dégrader, priver de son rang
regrado -- To degrade in rank, set back, lower
regrador -- revenir en arrière.
__decim
semidecima -- demi-dîme, impôt du vingtième
semidecimae -- moitié de la dîme.
__ieiun
semiieiunia -- half-fasts
semiieiunium -- demi-jeûne
__lix (camp-follower, perhaps Etruscan)
semilixula -- a half
semilixulae -- sorte de petits gâteaux
__path
semispatha -- a little
semispathium -- eine kleine
__seplasiar
seplasiarium -- boutique de parfumerie.
seplasiarius -- a dealer in unguents
__drom
septidromum -- espace de sept ans.
septidromus -- espace de sept ans
__rect=reg
subrectito -- to rise up, arise
surrectito -- to rise up, arise
__linqu
to leave behind, not take along, not stay with, leave, move away from, quit, abandon
sub.re.linquo -- Aug. laisser après soi.
de.re.linquo -- to forsake wholly, abandon, desert
ab.re.linquo -- tr., laisser
ob.re.linquo -- dabei zurücklassen
__aran
a frog, the frog-fish
/subterraneum -- a subterranean place
aranea -- a spider:
araneus -- a spider, Ct.
araneum -- a cobweb
eranus -- a fund contributed for mutual protection against want#
__uesper
the evening, even-tide % to become evening, grow towards evening, it grows dark % Abend machen, sich zum Abend neigen
subuesperus -- the southwest-by-west wind
aduesperasco -- evening is coming on, it draws toward evening; it is growing dark;
__cing
belt; sword belt; sash, girdle; band; saddle-girth; collar (dog);
succingulum -- an under-girdle, lower girdle
incingulum -- a girdle
__sucophant
sucophanta -- horn*
sucophantia -- craft, cunning, deceit; sing., Plur.
sucophantor -- to play the rogue, to deceive, trick, cheat
__fi=fio=fum
suffimento -- to fumigate
suffimentum -- fumigation, incense
__acer
a mass of similar objects, pile, heap: % to heap up, pile up, to multiply
superaceruo -- to heap on, pile up
coaceruo -- to heap together, heap up, collect in a mass, to amass, to multiply, heap
exaceruo -- tr., heap on;;
obacero -- to contradict, interrupt*
__mac
emacero -- tr., amaigrir
__cern
to separate, part, sift, to distinguish, discern, make out, perceive, see, to witness, invisible, To see mentally, discern, perceive, comprehend, understand, shows itself.&mdash;To decide, decree, determine, resolve, after the lot was decided, hereditatem, formally to declare oneself heir to, accept, enter upon % to fall headfirst; to dive; to turn a somersault; % - intr. - tomber la tête la première, faire la culbute. - tr. - courber.
supercerno -- to sift upon, over
discerno -- to separate, set apart, mark off, bound, part, divide
concerno -- to mix, mingle together
subcerno -- to sift through, to sift.
decerno -- to decide, determine, pronounce a decision, judge, decree, resolve, vote
secerno -- to put apart, sunder, sever, part, divide, separate
excerno -- to sift out, separate, part
incerno -- to sift in, add with a sieve
acernia -- an unknown fish
__cert
to match, vie with, fight, contend, struggle, combat, do battle, to contend, struggle, strive, be tried, the subject of arbitration, recited in competition, To contend, compete, wrestle, struggle, strive, vie, match, is your only rival, with all their might, striving to outdo one another, to compete, vie, emulate, rival % - intr. - Gloss. être renseigné. % to strive, struggle, contend
supercerto -- to fight over, to fight therefor
concerto -- to contend warmly, dispute zealously:
concertor -- c. concerto
discerto -- erörternd abmachen, erörtern
decerto -- to go through a contest, fight out
incerto -- to render uncertain;
2200
incertum -- an uncertainty, contingencies, for an indefinite time / adv. doubtfully, half awake*
__foed
to make foul, defile, pollute, disfigure, mutilate, mar, deform, laid waste, to disgrace, dishonor, mar, sully, desecrate
superfoedo -- tr., salir dessus
confoedo -- to pollute, defile
defoedo -- to defile
effoedo -- tr., souiller entièrement
__gaud
to rejoice, be glad, be joyful, take pleasure, be pleased, delight, sees with delight, gloat over, as for myself, in sinu, to rejoice at heart, be secretly glad, greet for me % inward joy, joy, gladness, delight, expressions of delight, Malice, Sensual pleasure, enjoyment, enjoyed, A joy, cause of joy, source of pleasure, delight
supergaudeo -- to rejoice over
praegaudeo -- to rejoice greatly
congaudeo -- to rejoice with one
pergaudeo -- to rejoice greatly
aggaudeo -- to be delighted with, to delight in
__mand1
to put in hand, deliver over, commit, consign, intrust, confide, commission, betake himself to flight, bury, commit to writing, suffer to grow old, To send word, pass the word, enjoin, commission, order, command, bid go and be hanged
praemando -- To order, command beforehand;, ut
demando -- to give in charge, intrust, commit
remando -- To send back word, to notify in return*
__mand2
supermando -- to chew, eat after
commando -- to chew
__pond=pend
superpondium -- an overweight
interpondium -- equipoise, equilibrium
dispondeus -- a double spondee#
dispondius -- dispondée, pied de deux spondées#
dipondium -- the sum of two#
__sell
a seat, settle, chair, stool, work-stool, teacher's chair, sedan-chair, on the front seat, A magistrate's seat, official chair
supersellium -- a shabrack
subsellium -- a low bench, seat, form, a senator's seat, of the accused, A judge's seat, the bench, a court, tribunal, a lawyer in the courts, as judge and advocate
assellor -- to go to stool, to void
assello -- durch den Stuhlgang von sich geben, kacken
__as=asin
asella -- a small she-ass
asellus -- a little ass, ass's colt
__sorb
to sup up, suck in, drink down, swallow up, absorb % a sorb-apple, serviceberry % the true sorb-, servicetree
supersorbeo -- - tr. - Placit. boire en outre.
persorbeo -- to suck, drink up, to absorb
resorbeo -- to suck back, swallow again
desorbeo -- to swallow down
exsorbeo -- to suck out, suck up, drain, drink
obsorbeo -- to sup, drink up, to swallow, gulp down
__spe
to hope, look for, trust, expect, promise oneself, non, to have no fear of, which I am confident will not happen.&mdash;To look for, expect, await, apprehend, fear, To trust, believe, assume, suppose, apprehend
superspero -- to hope exceedingly
praespero -- to hope beforehand
prospero -- to render fortunate, make happy, prosper
prospera -- 
despero -- to be hopeless, have no hope, despair of, give up
desperor -- c. despero, āre.
aspero -- to make rough, point, to whet, to excite, exasperate
__quill (dubious, Old Persian šiyātiš ‘comfort’, ‘well-being’, Old Church Slavonic počiti ‘to rest’, Old Norse hvīla ‘bed’; same root as tranquillus)
tranquillum -- a calm; a quiet sea
tranquillo -- to make calm, calm, still, compose, tranquillize, when order was restored at Rome
__flu
a river, Running water, stream % c. fluvius.
transfluuio -- int., passer un fleuve
transfluuium -- traversée d'un fleuve
profluuium -- flowing forth;
confluuium -- a conflux, confluence
diffluuio -- to divide, to split
defluuium -- A flowing down, flowing off
effluuium -- a flowing out, an outlet
__fret
a strait, sound, channel, narrow sea, the Strait of Messina, the Strait of Gibraltar, The sea, a strait, narrow sea, A gulf, abyss
transfreto -- to cross a strait, pass over the sea
perfreto -- to sail over
exfreto -- naviguer.
__fung=fing
to busy oneself, be engaged, perform, execute, administer, discharge, observe, do, observe, perform, have done with, murder, die, who have had experience of burial, serve as, survived, whose duty is done, render % Inscr. c. fungor. % a mushroom, fungus
transfungor -- passer, employer (le temps).
perfungor -- to fulfil, perform, discharge
defungor -- to have done with, acquit oneself of, discharge, perform, finish
__migr
to remove, depart, flit, migrate
transmigro -- to remove, migrate, transmigrate
praemigro -- to move away beforehand, before
commigro -- to remove, migrate, enter:
tramigro -- (Lebaigue P. 1281 et P. 1282) - intr. - 1 - émigrer, changer d'habitation. - 2 - au fig. être transplanté.
demigro -- to migrate, emigrate, move, depart, remove, go away
immigro -- to remove, migrate, change abode
admigro -- to go to, to come to, to be added to
remigro -- to journey back, go back, return
semigro -- to go away, remove
__spect=spec
transpectus -- a looking, seeing through
dispecto -- to consider, contemplate, examine
__pect
to comb; to card (wool, etc);
depecto -- to comb off, comb down, comb
oppecto -- to comb off;, to pluck, pick off, to pick, to eat
repecto -- to comb, card (wool);;
ampecto -- - tr. - peigner (au fig.), battre, rosser.
__pect=pac
compectum -- an agreement, concert, in accordance with a previous compact
__sult=salt
transsulto -- to leap over, across
praesulto -- to dance before, swagger before
persulto -- to leap about, prance, range through, scour
dissulto -- to leap apart, fly in pieces, burst asunder
subsulto -- to spring up, to leap, jump, hop
insulto -- to spring at, leap upon, leap, bound, jump, spring, to be insolent, scoff at, revile, abuse, taunt, insult, exult
insultus -- a scoffing, reviling, insult
resulto -- to spring back, rebound, To reverberate, resound, re-echo, ring
adsulto -- to leap at, attack, assault
adsultus -- an attack, assault, plur.
exsulto -- to spring vigorously, leap up, jump up, dancing, to move freely, expatiate, To exult, rejoice exceedingly, run riot, revel, vaunt, boast, indulge
desulto -- to leap down
__still
transtillum -- a little cross-beam*
distillo -- to drip, trickle down, to distil
__till
attillo -- to tickle, please
__uend
to sell, vend, to sell, give for a bribe, yield for pay, betray, betray, their lives, To cry up, trumpet, blazon, praise, commend
transuendo -- to dispose of by sale, to sell, alienate
prouendo -- tr., vendre au loin
diuendo -- to sell out, sell piecemeal, retail
reuendo -- to sell again
__urb
anteurbana -- 
suburbanum -- an estate near Rome, a suburban villa
suburbani -- the inhabitants of the towns near Rome
__sto
adroitness, craft, cunning, sing, cunningly, A stratagem
circumasto -- ringsherum stehen
proastium -- faubourg.#
__epistul
epistulares -- 
epistularii -- 
__nigr
to be black % - 1 - intr. - être noir. - 2 - tr. - rendre noir. % a black spot
internigro -- dazwischen schwarz sein
denigro -- to blacken utterly, dye, color very black
innigro -- einschwärzen, schwarz färben
__quer
to express grief, complain, lament, bewail, to complain, lament, coo, warble, sing, To express indignation, complain, make complaint, complain to you, to your father, in behalf of the state
interqueror -- 
2300
praequeror -- to complain beforehand
conqueror -- to complain, bewail, lament, deplore:
dequeror -- heftig beklagen
__scat
to gush out, bubble, spring forth; to swarm (with), be alive (with); % to bubble, gush, well up, spring forth % hervorsprudeln
interscateo -- dazwischen hervorquellen, -strudeln
praescateo -- sehr voll sein
__uibr
to set in tremulous motion, move to and fro, brandish, shake, agitate
interuibro -- dazwischen schimmern
conuibro -- - 1 - tr. - mouvoir avec rapidité. - 2 - intr. - s'élancer.
reuibro -- Act., to cast back, reflect
euibro -- to swing forwards, to hurl, throw
__futur
postfuturi -- those yet to be, posterity
postfuturum -- that which is to be, the future
__mod
to set a measure, set bounds, put restraint upon, moderate, mitigate, restrain, allay, temper, qualify, to sail slowly, To manage, regulate, rule, guide, govern, direct, were controlling, controlling, strike more harmoniously, with a rope % to moderate, verb. fin.
praemoderor -- das Maß vorschreiben
admoderor -- to keep to, within due limits, to moderate
__mod
to measure, measure rhythmically, modulate, P. pass., To accompany, dancing in time, To play, To play upon, P. pass. % c. modulor.
praemodulor -- vorher abmessen
commodulum -- a small advantage, profit
admodulo -- - tr. - faire résonner harmonieusement.
admodulor -- to accord, harmonize with
__uoc
reuocatoria -- a letter of recall*
euocatoria -- v. evocatorius.
__uac
to be empty, be void, be vacant, be without, not to contain % an empty space, an open or vacant place, a void, vacuity % to make empty, void; to empty, clear, free
subteruaco -- unterhalb leer sein
superuaco -- to be superfluous
interuaco -- dazwischen leer sein
euacuo -- to empty out, evacuate
__lat=fer
translatiua -- change a plea in court;;
collatiuum -- a contribution in money
__port
angiportus -- narrow street, alley; lane;
angiportum -- a narrow street, lane, alley
__argu
argumentum -- an argument, evidence, ground, support, proof, unsupported story, accepted as a proof, A sign, mark, token, evidence, indications, plausible ground, the matter, contents, subject, theme, burden, argument, upon a theme, a plot, subjects modelled
argumentor -- to adduce proof, To adduce in proof, To draw a conclusion
__sto
to stand, stand still, remain standing, be upright, be erect, in a bronze statue, Gn, Pa, To stand firm, remain in place, be immovable, last, remain, continue, abide, is moored, stuck fast, to be motionless, when the sea is at rest, staring, are fixed orbs of fire, To remain, tarry, linger, delay, wait, while he lingered, I wait, To stand in battle, fight, hold one's ground, stand firm, to stand, continue, to have been indecisive, to stand complete, be built, be finished, To stand out, stand upright, stand on end, bristle up, stiffen, be rigid, stands out, like a mass of dust, to stand, be erect, be undisturbed, per, person, to depend on, be chargeable to, lie at the door of, be due to, be the fault of, that it was my doing, it was not his fault, but for whose opposition.&mdash;To stand firm, be unshaken, endure, persist, abide, remain, continue, subsist, held our ground, to stand by, To be fixed, be determined: Pa, Ph, I am resolved, was it decided, To rest, depend, be upheld, lie, to stand, be approved, please, take, succeed, To take part, take sides, stand, stands at your side, stands by you, on whose side, price, to stand in, come to, cost, cost the Achaeans
circumsto -- to stand around, take place around:
contrasto -- - intr. - Hilar. s'opposer à.
intersto -- to stand, be between, in the midst of
supersto -- to stand upon, stand over
praesto -- to stand out, stand before, be superior, excel, surpass, exceed, be excellent
antesto -- to stand before, to excel, be superior to;, acc.;, absol., to distinguish one's self, to be distinguished
antestor -- to call as a witness, summon to testify, to call to witness, invoke
consto -- to agree, accord, be consistent, correspond, fit
persto -- to stand firmly, continue standing, remain unmoved
prosto -- to be on sale, be exposed for sale
substo -- to stand firm, hold out
costa -- a rib#
costum -- an Oriental aromatic plant#
exsto -- to stand out, stand forth, project, protrude, extend above, tower
insto -- to stand upon, take a position
obsto -- to stand before, be opposite
resto -- to withstand, resist, oppose, stand firm, hold out, not yield
adsto -- to stand at/on/by/near; to assist; to stand up/upright/waiting/still/on one's feet;
astus -- adroitness, craft, cunning, sing, cunningly, A stratagem#
ostium -- a door, out of doors, open, shut, bolt, door-tax, knocks at, A mouth, entrance, mouth, the Strait of Gibraltar#
__codi
codicillus -- notepad, small log; writing tablets; patent; petition to Emperor; will/codicil;
codicilli -- a writingtablet, note-book, A note, billet, A petition, An imperial rescript, patent, A will, testament
__nom
cognomino -- to be named/surnamed/called;
ignominia -- disgrace, dishonor, ignominy, inflicted by the Senate, degradation, infamy, disgrace, inflicted by a censor
ignominium -- c. ignominia.
__hon
to honor, dignify, decorate, adorn, grace, embellish, are escorted with honor % honesty, integrity, virtue, beauty, select in his associates
cohonesto -- to honor in common, do honor to, honor, grace
dehonesto -- to disgrace, dishonor
inhonesto -- to dishonor, disgrace
__lumbul
Apic. rognons. % a little loin
columbula -- little dove;
columbulus -- a little dove
__mac2
to spot, stain, defile, pollute, to defile, dishonor
commaculo -- to spot, stain, pollute, defile:
immaculo -- to stain
__milit
commilitium -- a campaigning together, comradeship, fellowship
permilito -- to serve out one's time as a soldier
__cub
concubina -- a concubine
concubinus -- catamite; male paramour; kept man, one who lives in concubinage;
__decor
to adorn, embellish, grace, beautify, decorate, arrayed in spoils, surrounds, to decorate, distinguish, honor % to deprive of the skin, outer covering; to skin, to peel % seemliness, propriety
condecoro -- to grace, applaud, honor:
dedecoro -- to disgrace, dishonor, bring to shame
indecoro -- to disgrace, disfigure
indecorae -- ill-favored women
__iur
coniuratus -- bound together by an oath, associate, allied, conspiring, of allies, m, conspirators, his new levies
coniurati -- ;;
__salu
to greet, wish health, pay respects, salute, hail, hailed as Caesar, sends greeting to, to pay reverence to, To call upon, visit, pay respects to, wait upon, To greet, welcome
consaluto -- to greet, salute cordially:
persaluto -- to salute in succession
resaluto -- to greet back; to greet in return;
adsaluto -- - tr. - saluer (qqn).
obsaluto -- int., se présenter pour saluer
desaluto -- saluer à différentes reprises
__spon
to promise sacredly, warrant, vow, give assurance, were entirely confident, to assume an obligation, promise solemnly, bind oneself, undertake, to engage, vouch, become security, enter bail, To make a wager of law, agree to a forfeit on failure to prove an assertion, to engage, stipulate, agree, conclude, promise, To promise in marriage, engage, betroth, to promise, forbode % a bedstead, bed-frame, A bed, couch, sofa, on the nearer side % a vessel used in making libations % substt.
conspondeo -- to exchange pledges; to engage/promise mutually (L+S);
despondeo -- to promise to give, promise, pledge
respondeo -- to answer, reply, respond, make answer
__tam
tamier [plante]. % - tr. - tacher, profaner, souiller.
contamino -- to bring into contact, mingle, blend, unite, To corrupt, defile, to corrupt, defile, pollute, stain, spoil, taint
attamino -- to touch;, to attack, rob, to dishonor, contaminate, defile
intamino -- - tr. - profaner, souiller.
__templ
an open place for observation, place marked off by the augur's staff, An open space, circuit, A consecrated place, sacred enclosure, sanctuary, the rostra, an asylum, A place dedicated to a deity, fane, temple, shrine, sepulchre
contemplo -- to observe/note/notice, gaze/look hard at, regard; to contemplate/consider carefully;*
contemplor -- to gaze at, view attentively, survey, behold, observe, contemplate*
__tumel
contumelia -- insult, abuse, affront, reproach, invective, contumely, disgrace, injury, assault, violence, violence, to the blows
contumelio -- - tr. - Inscr. outrager, violer.
contumelior -- - tr. - Gloss. outrager, violer.
__tumul
to cover with a mound, bury, inter, entomb, P. pass, m., named the town for the burial % c. tumulus
contumulo -- to cover with a mound, inter, bury
adtumulo -- tr., recouvrir de
__corollar
corollarium -- a garland, a gift, present, douceur, gratuity
corollaria -- a female merchant of flower-garlands, a title of a drama of N&aelig;vius
__lic
deliciolae -- a darling
deliciolum -- délices.
__dic
dictatura -- the office of a dictator, dictatorship
dictaturio -- tr., avoir envie de dire
__simul
to make like, imitate, copy, represent, assume the form of, counterfeit Troy, depict, imaging, represents the earth producing, To represent, feign, assume the appearance of, pretend, counterfeit, simulate, by pretending fear, to pretend that she was dead, pretend to be sick
dissimulo -- to make unlike, disguise
exsimulo -- c. simulo.
insimulo -- to make suspected, charge, accuse, blame, impeach
__simil=simul
adsimilo -- to make, like, to consider as similar, to compare
2400
__flag
a shameful act, passionate deed, outrage, burning shame, disgraceful thing, A shameful thing, shame, disgrace, is it not a shame?, absurdities.&mdash;A disgrace, rascal, scoundrel, Shame, disgrace % to demand urgently, require, entreat, solicit, press, importune, dun
efflagito -- to demand urgently, request earnestly, solicit, insist, required
reflagito -- to demand again, demand back
__elephant
elephantus -- an elephant
elephantia -- a very virulent kind of leprosy, elephantiasis
__ergas
ergastulum -- a workhouse, house of correction, penitentiary
ergastulus -- a foreman in a workhouse
__postul
to ask, demand, claim, require, request, desire, expect, undertake to deceive him, asked an audience, were claimed, expects, of the praetor, To summon, arraign before a court, prosecute, accuse, impeach, ask leave to prosecute, ask that the slaves be examined under torture, the appointment of a special tribunal, to demand, ask, to make necessary, require, demand, call for
expostulo -- to demand pressingly, insist on
appostulo -- to entreat, solicit importunately
depostulo -- to demand, require earnestly
__duc
inductorium -- a covering
adductorium -- tapisserie (à l'eentrée du tabernacle), portière.
deductorium -- a drain
__ced
to go from, give place, remove, withdraw, go away, depart, retire, to be seen, to be evacuated, to leave the exchange, be bankrupt, to cede, assign, to retreat, abandon, the retreating enemy, to pass away, go from, drop out, vanish, die, elapse, be forgotten, To come to, fall, as a possession, to fall to the lot of, accrue, To result, happen, turn out, fall out, work, were successful, in proportion to his success at the outset, in, to take the place of, supply the want of, be a substitute for, are taken in commutation, To yield, give place, to warlike zeal, to yield to, retreat before, submit to, be overcome by, who were unharmed, succumb, To yield in rank, be inferior, were not inferior.&mdash;To comply with, yield to, obey, conform to, I comply, To grant, concede, allow, give up, yield, permit
intercedo -- to come between, intervene, be between
introcedo -- to enter;
retrocedo -- to go back, retire, recede
supercedo -- - tr. - Apul. dépasser.
antecedo -- to go before, get the start, precede:
praecedo -- to go before, precede, lead the way, lead
abscedo -- to give way, go off, move away, retire, withdraw, depart:
concedo -- to go away, pass, give way, depart, retire, withdraw, remove:
discedo -- to go apart, part asunder, divide, separate, disperse, scatter
procedo -- to go before, go forward, advance, proceed, march on, move forward, go forth
succedo -- to go below, come under, enter, to be buried, To go from under, go up, mount, ascend, To follow, follow after, take the place of, relieve, succeed, receive by succession, come next, To approach, draw near, march on, advance, march up, to come under, submit to, take up, To follow, follow after, succeed, speak after, to another's bad administration, To go on well, be successful, prosper, succeed, had been victorious under disadvantages of position
percedo -- 
accedo -- to go to, come to, come near, draw near, approach, enter:
decedo -- to go away, depart, withdraw, retire
excedo -- to go out, go forth, depart, retire, withdraw
incedo -- to advance, march, proceed, stride, move, stalk, strut
recedo -- to go back, fall back, give ground, retire, withdraw, recede
secedo -- to go apart, go away, separate, withdraw, go aside, retire
occedo -- to go towards, go to, go up to;
acedia -- dégoût, indifférence, découragement.#
acedior -- to be morose, peevish#
__cip=cap
a pale, stake, post, pillar
intercipio -- to seize in passing, intercept, take the poison intended for another, cut off, to be wanting, To interrupt, hinder, cut off, preoccupy, preclude, To take away, snatch, rob, carried off
praecipio -- to take beforehand, get in advance, had borrowed in advance, get something of a start, preoccupy, have dried up, ripens prematurely, to take in advance, obtain beforehand, anticipate, I will not anticipate, got an earlier view, anticipated by rumor, gain some advantage in time, by priority, I rejoice in advance, figured to themselves beforehand, to imagine beforehand, had already suspected, To give rules, advise, admonish, warn, inform, instruct, teach, enjoin, direct, bid, order, recommend, prescribe, teaches
praecipuum -- I. that which is received from an inheritance before the general distribution of the property II. excellence, superiority*
praecipua -- excellence, superiority*
concipio -- to take hold of, take up, take in, take, receive, draws up, kindled, To conceive, become pregnant, the fruit of sin, to imagine, conceive, think, grasps in imagination, To understand, comprehend, perceive, To adopt, harbor, entertain, conceive, assume, To draw up, comprisc, express in words, compose, as our phrase is, a form, to report definitely, To promulgate, declare formally, phrase
percipio -- to take wholly, seize entirely, take possession of, seize, occupy, To take to oneself, assume, To get, collect, obtain, to perceive, observe, were heard, hear, To feel, To learn, know, conceive, comprehend, understand, perceive, know, known
suscipio -- to take, catch, take up, lift up, receive, to receive, admit, take as a citizen, to take up, acknowledge, recognize, bring up as one's own, to get, beget, bear, have, to undertake, assume, begin, incur, enter upon, undertake to prove, take upon himself, To undergo, submit to, incur, bear, accept, suffer, wilfully incur guilt, ut, to allow, admit, to take up, answer
accipio -- to take without effort, receive, get, accept, to take, accept, take into possession, receive, inherit, by the hands of, To admit, let in, to citizenship, To take under protection, wedded, To receive as a guest, entertain, welcome, into your confidence, to entertain, deal with, treat, to collect, P., received, collected, to credit, give credit for, entered to the credit of inheritance, owe to bequests, acknowledge that he owes his life, to discharge the bond, acknowledge payment of the sponsio, to receive, get, be the recipient of, take, submit to, suffer, bear, has felt the power of, take this risk, to admit, take in, receive, open to, the impression I received, to take, hear, attend to, perceive, understand, learn, listen to, as I have heard, have not heard of them, understood, had eagerly welcomed news of both, take, exchange solemn assurances, to take, interpret, explain, to regard as an insult, being exaggerated, take kindly, with displeasure, to regard a thing as an omen, accept the omen, to receive as a, favorable, omen, omen, I accept, the omen, and, To accept, be satisfied with, approve, Pam, I allow it, exactly so, To take upon, undertake, assume, undergo, in which ... succeeds to the command, stand the trial, agree for Q. to stand trial
decipio -- to catch, ensnare, entrap, beguile, elude, deceive, cheat, by the pretence of, bereaved, is beguiled, were hidden, to deceive, elude, called forth by a false notion
excipio -- extract, gather, except/set aside, withhold;;
excipium -- spear;;#
excipuum -- ce qui est excepté.
incipio -- to take hold, take in hand, begin, in answer to, fall asleep, To have a beginning, begin, originate, arise
occipio -- to begin, commence, enter upon*
recipio -- to keep back; recover; to undertake; to guarantee; to accept, take in; to take back;
recipisco -- to recover
__rog
to ask, question, interrogate % a funeral pile % A funeral pile
interrogo -- to ask, question, inquire, interrogate
praerogo -- To ask before, to ask first
prorogo -- to prolong, continue, extend, protract*
subrogo -- to put the vote on the choice of a substitute, cause to be elected in place of another, put in another's place, substitute (cf. sufficio, of the people)
corrogo -- to bring together by entreaty, collect, drum up, obtain by soliciting*
perrogo -- to ask in succession, complete the roll-call
surrogo -- - tr. - 1 - mettre à la place, substituer, élire en remplacement, remplacer, élire en plus. - 2 - ajouter (qqch à une loi).
abrogo -- to repeal, annul, abrogate:*
adrogo -- to add, associate with.*
derogo -- to repeal in part, restrict, modify
irrogo -- To propose, against*
obrogo -- to repeal by implication, supersede, invalidate by a new law*
exrogo -- changer une disposition de loi
erogo -- to appropriate, pay out, pay, expend (usu. from the public treasury)*
__intestin
intestina -- intestines
intestinum -- a gut, mesentery, rectum, the intestines, entrails, bowels
intestinae -- 
intestini -- 
__cunct=cont (dubious, spear)
to delay, linger, loiter, hesitate, doubt % to delay, hesitate
percuncto -- to question strictly, particularly, to inquire earnestly
decunctor -- to hesitate, to be at a loss*
__cont
percontor -- to ask particularly, question strictly, inquire, interrogate, investigate, of her too he wished to ask some questions
__crebr
to become frequent, increase, spread abroad, it is generally reported
percrebresco -- to become frequent, grow prevalent, be spread abroad
concrebresco -- to become frequent, increase, gather strength
increbresco -- to quicken, grow, increase, rise, spread
increbro -- to do any thing frequently
__graec
to imitate the Greeks, live in the Greek manner
pergraecor -- to imitate the Greeks, live in the Greek manner
congraeco -- to lavish on banquets like the Greeks, to squander in luxury
__seuer
perseuero -- to abide, adhere strictly, continue steadfastly, persist, persevere, kept on its course, persisted
adseuero -- to affirm, insist on, maintain, assert, aver, Is this seriously maintained?&mdash;To show, prove
__cell=collis
a place of concealment, store-room, cell, granary, to furnish household stores, as household supplies.&mdash;A chamber, closet, cabinet, hut, cot, mean abodes, the cells, A sanctuary, shrine, An oil-press % to strike / to rise, tower, P
praecelleo -- to excel, surpass
praecello -- to surpass, excel, to rule over
antecello -- to be prominent, distinguish oneself, excel, surpass, be superior, with respect to honor
percello -- to beat down, throw down, overturn, upset, To strike, smite, hit, to cast down, overthrow, ruin, destroy, To strike with consternation, deject, daunt, dispirit, discourage, dishearten, drove in dismay
procella -- a violent wind, storm, hurricane, tempest, A storm, tumult, violence, commotion, vehemence, civil commotions, A charge, onset, sudden attack*
procello -- to throw, cast down, lie down;
surcellus -- c. surculus
excello -- to be eminent, be superior, surpass, excel, your most conspicuous crimes
decello -- to turn aside, deviate
recello -- to spring back, fly back, recoil
__oc
ocellus -- a little eye, eyelet, eyeballs
__porc
porcella -- a little female pig
porcellus -- a little pig, Plur., the litter
__cept=cap
praeceptum -- a maxim, rule, precept, order, direction, command, injunction, commands*
praecepto -- to prescribe often*
discepto -- to decide, determine, judge, arbitrate, sit as umpire, for arbitration, To debate, dispute, discuss, strive, to be at stake*
conceptus -- a conceiving, conception*
concepto -- To conceive, become pregnant*
conceptum -- -I. fin. -II. to unite herself in marriage, to marry, wed*
concepta -- subst., measures, capacity*
percepta -- v. percipio fin.
recepto -- to take back, wrest away, To receive habitually, harbor, entertain, my son's visits, admit, reflex., to betake oneself, withdraw, retire, recede
2500
receptus -- a taking back, retraction, recantation, a falling back, retiring, retreat, way of retreat, retreat being difficult, cano or signum, to sound a retreat, signal for retreat, a retreat, withdrawal, way of escape, cano or signum, directing him to stop hostilities, to give the signal for leaving off, cease, A refuge, place of shelter
receptum -- subst., an engagement, obligation, guaranty
accepta -- a portion of land granted to an individual by the state*
accepto -- to take, receive, accept
acceptum -- the receipt, the credit side, to carry to the credit side, pass to one's credit, ledger, from the receipts and payments
decepto -- tr., avoir l'hahitude de tromper*
excepto -- to take out, take up, catch, to snuff up
incepto -- to begin, attempt, To begin, get into a quarrel*
inceptum -- a beginning, An attempt, undertaking, A purpose, subject, theme*
occepto -- to begin*
__gust
to taste, take a little of, To take a slight meal, take luncheon, eat a little, to taste, partake of, enjoy, heard for a while, learn a little of % A light dish at the beginning of a Roman meal, an antepast, whet, relish % a tasting
praegusto -- to taste beforehand
pergustus -- taste
degusto -- to taste
ingusto -- to give to taste
regusto -- to read over, enjoy repeatedly
__angust
angustiae -- narrow passage/place/space (pl.), defile; strait, pass; difficulties; meanness;
angustia -- narrowness, straitness, a narrow place, narrow part, neck, defile, strait, pass, shortness, scarcity, want, poverty, Difficulty, distress, perplexity, Narrowness, meanness, narrowness of view, verbal trifling, brevity, succinctness
angustio -- to make narrow, to straiten;, to straiten, hamper, distress
angusto -- to make narrow, straiten
angustum -- a narrow place, brought into narrow limits, a critical condition, embarrassment, difficulty, danger
__sent
to discern by sense, feel, hear, see, perceive, be sensible of, before they should be observed, To perceive, feel the effects of, feel, experience, suffer, undergo, endure, had been wasted by, to feel, perceive, discern, understand, observe, notice, became aware of their retreat, as far as I have observed, does not enter, to feel, experience, To think, deem, judge, imagine, suppose, be of opinion, believe, mean, most patriotic, in earnest, agree in opinion, acts on one side, while his convictions are with the other, and were fully convinced that, were aware, To give an opinion, vote, declare, decide % to perceive, note, observe
praesentio -- to feel beforehand, perceive in advance, have a presentiment of, presage, divine
praesentia -- a being at hand, presence, presence of mind, Impression, efficacy, effect, at the present time, at the moment, just now, for the present, under present circumstances, to conceal for the time, at hand
praesento -- to place before, exhibit to view, to show, present, hold out, handed, presented to
praesentisco -- to begin to have a presentiment of
consentio -- to agree, accord, harmonize, assert unitedly, determine in common, decree, unite upon:
consentes -- consentes dii : the twelve superior deities
consentium -- a council*
dissentio -- to differ, dissent, disagree, be at odds, contradict, quarrel
dissentior -- c. dissentio.
persentio -- to feel deeply
persentisco -- to perceive clearly, detect
prosentio -- to perceive beforehand
subsentio -- to observe stealthily, spy out
adsentio -- to agree with, assent, approve:
adsentior -- to give assent, approve, agree with:
adsentor -- to assent constantly, flatter, fawn, in everything
essentia -- the being, essence#
cosentio -- 
__stol#
a woman's upper garment, long robe, gown, stole % trajet par eau, navigation / équipement d'une flotte
praestolor -- to stand ready for, wait for, expect
praestolo -- c. praestolor.
__ulcer
to make sore, cause to ulcerate, wound your heart
redulcero -- to make sore again, to scratch open again
exulcero -- to make worse, exasperate, embitter
inulcero -- to ulcerate
reulcero -- ulcérer de nouveau
__porr
to stretch out, spread out, put forth, reach out, extend, by raising hands, extends, lengthen, To lay at length, stretch out, To hold forth, reach out, extend, offer, present, hand, present his head to the marriage halter, manūs, to reach after, strive for, seek to obtain, se, to extend, reach, grow, To prolong, extend
reporrigo -- to reach forth or hand again
exporrigo -- to spread out
__senar
senariolus -- a little senarius, trifling verse of six feet
senarioli -- de petits sénaires, petite pièce en ïambes
__cil
An eyelid
supercilium -- an eyebrow, A brow, ridge, summit, at the bottom of the projection, a nod, will, Pride, haughtiness, arrogance, superciliousness, gloom
intercilium -- the space between the eyebrows
concilio -- to bring together, unite, reconcile, make friendly, win over, conciliate, seeks as allies, the throne through the favor of Jupiter, To procure, purchase, obtain, acquire, win, gain, you bad bargain, to extort, to cause, bring about, procure, mediate, acquire, make, produce, To commend
concilium -- a meeting, rendezvous, A collection of people, meeting, assembly, An assembly for consultation, council, a bond of union, tie
porcilia -- a young sow#
succilus -- extravasation ou suffusion du sang dans les paupières
ancile -- a small oval shield, V.;*
incile -- - 1 - Cato. rigole, fossé (de drainage, d'évacuation). - 2 - fig. Cic. bourbier.*
incilo -- to rebuke, blame#
__arma
armamentum -- equipment (pl.), rigging/sailing gear (of a ship); implements, utensils;
armamenta -- implements, utensils, the equipment of a ship, tackle
__argent
argentaria -- bank; banking-house, banking business; silver-mine;
argentarium -- a place for keeping silver, a cupboard or safe for plate
__fect=fac
praefectus -- an overseer, director, superintendent, a president, superintendent, commander, governor, deputy, governor of the province, admiral, commander, chief engineer, colonels of cavalry, commanders of armies
suffectus -- c. suffectio ;
effectus -- an effecting, execution, accomplishment, performance, an outward act, nearly done, An operation, effect, result
effectum -- an effect
effecto -- to put out of use, to abolish, ante med.*
refectus -- a restoration
adfecto -- to strive after, strive to obtain, aspire to, pursue, aim at, lay claim to, to cling to, cherish, win a way into favor with, set upon me, To enter upon, pursue, what career it is entering on, To lay hold of, grasp, attacks, To influence, win over
adfector -- - dép. tr. - c. adfecto.
infecto -- - tr. - Apul. troubler (au fig.).*
defecti -- 
__mem
I remember, recollect, think of, am mindful of, bear in mind, be sure to, is inclined, To make mention of, mention
commemini -- to recollect clearly, remember well:
rememini -- to recall to mind, to remember
__mem
memory, remembrance, hand down to posterity, transmit, is related, The faculty of remembering, memory, recollection, recall to mind, commit to memory, remember, in my recollection, forget, forget, from memory.&mdash;The time of remembrance, period of recollection, time, not long ago, in earlier times, of our time, since the memory of man.&mdash;An historical account, relation, narration, record % to bring to remembrance, mention, recount, relate, speak of, say, tell, was said to have been, To speak, utter, make use of, To name, call % to remember, be mindful of
commemoro -- to recall to memory, call to mind, be mindful of, keep in mind, remember:
rememoror -- to remember again, call to mind, acc., rel.-clause
immemoria -- unmindfulness, forgetfulness
__munic
arch. pour communico
communico -- to divide with, communicate, impart, share, to consult, To share in, take part, partake, participate in, regards that man's cause as his own.&mdash; To join, unite, add, connect
communicor -- to impart, share
__robor
to make strong, strengthen, invigorate, confirm, acquires vigor % to grow strong, vigorous
corroboro -- to strengthen, invigorate, make strong, corroborate
irroborasco -- to acquire strength, take root, become confirmed
__ag
abagmentum -- a means for procuring abortion
coagmento -- to join, cement together, connect, to connect, to conclude
coagmentum -- a joining together, joint
__abecedar
abecedarium -- a, b, c, the alphabet
abecedaria -- elementary instruction
__lig=ling
to lick up, to be dainty, be nice, To enjoy by stealth, To long for, desire eagerly
abligurrio -- to consume in dainty living, waste in feasting (rare):
obligurrio -- to devour, consume, squander
__blat
to talk foolishly, babble, prate
adblatero -- to prattle, to chatter
deblatero -- to prate of, to babble, blab out, inf.
__fect=fac
adfectito -- N.-Tir. fréq. de adfecto.
defectito -- fréq. de deficio
effectito -- tr., fréq. de efficio, faire souvent
__hosp
she who entertains, a hostess, fem, A visitor, guest, friend % a hospitable reception, entertainment, Hospitality, tie of hospitality, relation of host and guest, friendship, A place of entertainment, lodging, inn, guest-chamber % to be a guest, to put up, lodge, sojourn as a guest
adhospito -- to entertain as guest.
inhospita -- contrées inhospitalières
__stipul
to engage, bargain, covenant, stipulate, bargain for what you will, promised % a stalk, stem, blade, halm, a screeching reed-pipe, Dried stalks, straw, stubble, beanstalks, quickly extinguished fire % to exact, bargain for, stipulate, pass., Part. pass.
adstipulor -- - intr. avec dat. - 1 - s'engager avec qqn, s'engager pour qqn. - 2 - approuver, soutenir, donner son adhésion à, faire cause commune avec qqn.
adstipulo -- to join in a stipulation, to stipulate with, to agree with one
instipulor -- to bargain, stipulate for
restipulor -- to stipulate in return, exact a reciprocal promise
__su
adsumentum -- that which is to be sewed upon, a patch
insumentum -- Itala. morceau, pièce rapportée.
2600
__aegr
aegrimonia -- sorrow, anxiety, trouble
aegrimonium -- malaise moral, chagrin, peine morale
__pull
to put forth, sprout, shoot, come forth, swarms with, to spread % to put forth, sprout out, to bud, bourgeon
ampullula -- petite fiole, burette.#
expullulo -- - intr. - pousser beaucoup de rejetons.
repullulo -- to sprout forth again
__anabathr
anabathrum -- an elevated place for beholding public games, tiers of benches that rest on hired beams
anabathra -- raised seats (in a theatre), Iu.
diabathrum -- a sort of slipper#
__anser
anserculus -- a little goose, a gosling
__asser=anser
asserculus -- petite solive, petit chevron, petit pieu.
__part
anteparta -- Plaut. biens acquis antérieurement.
compartior -- to divide something with one, to share, Pass.
dispartio -- to distribute, divide
dispartior -- c. dispertio.
impartio -- fut., dep.
departio -- zerteile
__anthrisc
anthriscum -- the southern chervil
anthriscus -- the southern chervil
__antistit
antistita -- a female superintendent, high-priestess
antistitium -- the office of an, the chief-priest's office
__thet
antithetum -- antithèse.
antitheta -- die Gegensätze
__pect
appectoro -- to press to the breast
depectoro -- saigner [un animal] à la poitrine
expectoro -- to drive from the breast
__pet
to strive after, seek for repeatedly, eagerly, to pursue;
appetisso -- to strive for, to seek earnestly, appetis
expetisso -- - tr. - souhaiter, désirer.
__mim
archimima -- Inscr. actrice principale d'un mime.
archimimus -- chief mimic actor, pantomime, fem., chief mimic actress
__arm
armilausa -- a military upper garment
armilausia -- espèce de blouse ouverte en avant et en arrière, fermée seulement sur les épaules
__aspratur
aspratura -- petite monnaie (rugueuse).
ospratura -- the purchase of pulse#
__sequ
that which follows, a follower
assequela -- a succeeding, succession
obsequela -- compliance, complaisance, obsequiousness, through obsequiousness in speaking, because they spoke as he liked
__astr
astronomia -- astronomie.
astronomus -- an astronomer
__cochlear
cochleare -- - 1 - cuiller. - 2 - cuillerée (mesure pour les liquides).
cochlearium -- An enclosure, pen in which snails were kept and fed
__labor
to labor, take pains, endeavor, exert oneself, strive, in behalf of, to work out, work at, produce by toil, elaborate, form, make, prepare, cultivate, bread, To suffer, labor under, be oppressed, be afflicted, be troubled, be oppressed with debt, To grieve, be in trouble, be vexed, be concerned, be solicitous, be anxious, love, do not concern myself.&mdash;To be in distress, be in difficulty, undergo danger, is eclipsed, groaning
collaboro -- to labor with, together
adlaboro -- to labor, toil:
delaboro -- to work hard, to overwork
illaboro -- to work upon, labor at
elaboro -- to take pains, exert oneself; to bestow care on;
__lat
collatero -- to admit on both sides
elaterium -- a medicine prepared from the juice of the wild cucumber*
__coll
colliculus -- a little hill
coliculus -- the small stalk, stem of a plant;#
ollicula -- a little pot#
alicula -- a light upper garment, a child's coat#
__lim
collimitium -- the boundary between two countries
collimito -- int., confiner à
collimitor -- to border upon
delimito -- to mark out
__lum
to light up, brighten, illumine
collumino -- to illuminate on all sides
perlumino -- to shine through, illumine greatly, med.
illumino -- to illuminate, give light to; to light up; to reveal/throw light on; to brighten (w/color);
relumino -- to light up again, reillumine
__baiul
to carry a burden, to bear something heavy % he who bears burdens, a porter, carrier, day-laborer
combaiulo -- - tr. - porter des fardeaux.
subbaiulo -- - tr. - Aug. porter sur les épaules.
__matur
to make ripe, ripen, bring to maturity, ripened, ripe, to make haste, hasten, accelerate, quicken, despatch, expedite, do deliberately, To hurry, precipitate, give too soon % - intr. - Aug. mûrir. % to become ripe, ripen, come to maturity % Powerful, vigorous
commaturesco -- to ripen thoroughly
permaturesco -- to ripen fully
permaturo -- to become quite ripe
admaturo -- to mature (once):
dematuro -- - tr. - hâter, activer.*
__mit
to soften, make tender, ripen, mellow, tame, soften, make fruitful, clear, to make gentle, pacify, soothe, calm, assuage, appease, mitigate, disarm, appease the anger of
commitigo -- to make soft, mellow:
demitigo -- to make mild
__pag
a leaf of paper, sheet, page, letter. &mdash;A slab, tablet, upon one's statue, recording his claims to honor % - tr. - écrire.
compagina -- a joining together, combination
compagino -- To join together
propagino -- to propagate
__ping
to grow fat, be fattened, be enriched
compinguesco -- to thicken to a solid substance
impinguesco -- s'engraisser.
__com=comeo
a place of assembly, place of meeting, the Ephoreium, a place adjoining the Forum, in which the Comitia curiata were held, the comitium % to accompany, attend, follow, P. pass. % to join as an attendant, accompany, attend, follow, with, with purses, To attend to the grave, to follow, accompany, attend % the Roman people in assembly, comitia curiata, the general assembly of the Roman people, for electing consuls, for electing tribunes of the plebs, An election % of other elections % - intr. - convoquer le peuple sur le comitium, aller sur le comitium.
concomitor -- to attend, accompany, part., perf., Part. perf., pass.
incomitio -- to insult, reproach in public
__crass
to grow thick, to thicken, grow dense, hard, grow large, fat % to make thick, thicken, condense
concrasso -- to thicken, make thick
incrasso -- to make thick, stout, part.
__crisp
- intr. - Suet. glousser. % to swing, brandish
concrispo -- friser, faire onduler / brandir
incrispo -- to crisp, curl
__flacc
to be flaccid, flag, droop, loses courage % to wither, droop, languish % to wilt, wither, dry up
conflaccesco -- to grow quite languid
inflacceo -- to become flaccid, weak;, to become useless
__flamm
to kindle, inflame, blaze, burn, inflamed with anger % a blazing fire, blaze, flame, take fire, blazing stars, a torch, funeral torch, fire and sword, heat, glare, fever, suffer extreme hunger, sooner will fire mingle with water, the flame of passion, fire of love, glow, flame, passion, wrath, A devouring flame, danger, destruction, ruin, raging hunger % to become inflamed % a red bridal veil, keeps changing husbands
conflammo -- to inflame
sufflammo -- to kindle, inflame
deflammo -- to extinguish, put out (the flame of); to deprive of flame (L+S);
inflammo -- to set on fire, light up, kindle
reflammo -- int., rallumer
__fluct=flu
to move in waves, wave, undulate, fluctuate, wavetossed, swims in light, to be restless, be unquiet, rage, swell, To waver, hesitate, vacillate, fluctuate % a flood, flow, tide, wave, billow, surge, to the waves, a tempest in a tea-pot, turbulence, commotion, disturbance % c. fluito. % to waver, be in doubt, hesitate
confluctuo -- to wave on all sides
perfluctuo -- to flow through, to swarm over
refluctuo -- int., refluer
__gemin
to double, repeat, repeated, do it again, To pair, couple, join, unite, strike together % twins; as a constellation Gemini 
congemino -- to redouble, multiply:
ingemino -- to redouble, repeat, reiterate
__quaer
to seek, look for, was looking for, asking for, To seek to obtain, look for, strive for, seek, prejudice is excited, provoke, to seek, strive, endeavor, ask, let me rather, To strive to gain, earn, win by effort, acquire, that he must earn something.&mdash;To feel the want of, miss, lack, To ask, desire, require, demand, need, call for, what do you mean by?, made necessary, to seek mentally, think over, meditate, aim at, plan, devise, find, To seek to learn, make inquiry, ask, inquire, interrogate, has been made a question, made inquiries, to examine under torture, To examine, inquire into, make inquiry, investigate, the investigation should be made, to inquire, consider, in short, to speak the truth
conquaero -- g:
__quir=quaer
exquiro -- to search out, seek diligently, inquire into, scrutinize, inquire, ask, to be too exacting in, ransack, seek, implore, ascertained, devise
__simil
a comparison, likeness, parallel, simile % to make a thing like another; to imitate, copy, represent a thing % the finest wheat flour
consimilia -- choses semblables
consimilo -- to compare
adsimilo -- to make, like, to consider as similar, to compare
insimilo -- v. insimulo.
__solid
to make firm, make dense, solidify, compact, strengthen % solid figure; firm/hard material; firm/solid/unyielding ground; a whole; % to become firm, solid, whole
consolida -- a plant, also called, black briony, comfrey#
consolido -- to make firm, solid, to make thick, condense
persolido -- to make quite solid
assolido -- tr., consolider
2700
exsolido -- - tr. - consolider.
obsolido -- to make firm, fast, to harden, consolidate, part. pass.
__spiss
to become thick, to thicken, condense % to thicken, make thick, condense.
conspisso -- - tr. - condenser, épaissir [employé surt. au part.].
inspisso -- tr., épaissir
__spurc
to defile
conspurco -- to defile, pollute
inspurco -- to defile
__stirp
to run to stalk
constirpo -- extirper.
exstirpo -- to root out, eradicate, extirpate
__subig
to drive up, bring up, drive up stream, To turn up from beneath, break up, dig up, plough, cultivate, work, knead, rub down, sharpen, whet, tame, break, easy to be tamed, to put down, overcome, conquer, subjugate, subject, subdue, reduce, To bring, incite, impel, force, compel, constrain, reduce, to cultivate, train, discipline
consubigo -- to work, knead, mix together, med.
prosubigo -- to dig up, cast up
__tem
to treat rashly, violate, profane, defile, dishonor, disgrace, desecrate, outrage
contemero -- to pollute, violate
intemero -- tr., souiller, profaner
__ct#
contracto -- verse
dicto -- to dictate, suggest, remind, put in their mouths, to you, compose, appointed, designated, direct the charge
dictum -- something said, a saying, word, assertion, remark, of poetry, books, on the word, A saying, maxim, proverb, A witty saying, bon-mot, prophecies, An order, command, A promise, assurance
suctus -- a sucking
__trect=traho
contrecto -- to touch, handle, come in contact with, feel, violated, to turn over, dwell upon*
pertrecto -- to touch, feel, handle
detrecto -- to decline, refuse, reject, shirk
obtrecto -- to detract from, belittle, disparage, underrate, decry, carp at, decried one another
adtrecto -- to touch; lay hands on; to handle (roughly), to assault (sexually), to violate; to deal with;
retrecto -- To take hold of, handle again; to take in hand again, undertake anew
__coriandr
coriandrum -- coriander
coriandrus -- coriander
__rticul#
corticulus -- a small, thin rind, bark, shell
articulus -- a joint, knuckle, the fingers, a part, member, at the nick of time
articulo -- to divide into single members, joints;, to utter distinctly, to articulate
__argent
silver, wrought, wrought and coined, Silver plate, silver work, Coined silver, silver money, money % 
deargento -- To deprive of money
inargento -- to overlay with silver, to silver
__deca
decaproti -- the ten chief men
decaprotia -- the office and dignity of the
__cort
decortico -- to deprive of the bark: to bark, to peel
excortico -- - tr. - écorcer.
__dole
pain
dedolentia -- the abandonment of grief, ceasing to lament
indolentia -- freedom from pain, insensibility
__prop
to appease, propitiate
depropitio -- to propitiate, reconcile
expropitio -- rendre propice
repropitio -- to propitiate again, make propitiation for
__runc
to plane off % a plane
deruncino -- to plane off;, to deceive, cheat; to shave
eruncino -- c. runcino
__stin=stan%
destinata -- a betrothed female, bride
destinatum -- a mark, target, a plan, purpose, the dispositions
__sult=salt
desultura -- a leaping, jumping down
insultura -- a springing, leaping at, upon
__test
detestatum -- renonciation faite avec témoins.
intestata -- 
__fatig
to weary, tire, fatigue, vex, harass, fret, mar, to weary, fatigue, importune, harass, plague, torment, vex, lay siege to, wear out, To vex with raillery, jeer, banter
diffatigo -- c. defatigo.
defatigo -- to weary out, tire, fatigue, exhaust
infatigo -- not to weary
__fibul
To bind, fasten together
diffibulo -- to unclasp, unbuckle
confibulo -- tr., attacher (lier) ensemble
effibulo -- - tr. - dégrafer.
exfibulo -- to unclasp, loosen
infibulo -- to clasp, buckle, button together, to close with a clasp, pin
offibulo -- - tr. - mettre une agrafe, attacher solidement.
refibulo -- to unclasp, unbuckle, unloose
__fumig
to smoke, fumigate; to treat with/subject to smoke; to produce smoke (L+S); to steam; % a fumigating, fumigation
diffumigo -- to fumigate
suffumigo -- to fumigate from below, to suffumigate, med., Absol.
__diplom
diplomarium -- c. diploma.
diplomarius -- one who carried out the imperial letters of recommendation
__para
disparatum -- a direct opposition*
apparatus -- a preparing, providing, preparation, getting ready, Apparatus, tools, implements, engines, supplies, material, instruments, military engines, Magnificence, splendor, pomp, state, display, elaboration
__seren
to make clear, clear up, make serene, growing clear % temps serein, ciel serein, sérénité.
disserenasco -- to clear up, grow clear
dissereno -- tr., éclaircir, rendre serein
__syllab
disyllaba -- dissyllabes
disyllabae -- dissyllabic words, dissyllables
__uent
to toss in the air, fan, air, sways, displays, is incited
diuentilo -- to spread abroad.
reuentilo -- to produce again
euentilo -- to set in motion, to fan
__elacaten
elacatena -- Fest. une espèce de thon.
elacatenes -- a large sea-fish, a tunny
__boliar
emboliaria -- an actress who performed in the interludes
emboliarius -- acteur d'intermèdes.
__aphract
aphracta -- même sens
aphractus -- (uncovered), a ship without a deck, open boat.
aphractum -- a long vessel without a deck
__plastr
emplastro -- to inoculate by inserting a bit of the bark with the eye, to scutcheongraft, to bud
emplastra -- a plaster.
implastro -- c. emplastro.
__unct
the anointing-room
emunctoria -- Vulg. mouchettes.
emunctorium -- a pair of snuffers
__sculent
esculenta -- mets, aliments.
esculentia -- - 1 - Hier. aliment savoureux. - 2 - Isid. graisse, embonpoint.
__amaric
to make bitter
examarico -- to imbitter exceedingly
inamarico -- to imbitter
__cand
pure, clear, serene, clean, spotless % to make glittering, bright, to make white, P. a. % le blanc, la couleur blanche.
excandido -- - tr. - rendre tout blanc.
incandido -- to make white, to cleanse
__cept=cap
exceptorium -- a receptacle, reservoir; plur.
receptorium -- a place of shelter
__empl=em
exemplare -- arch. pour exemplar)
exemplares -- copies
exemplarium -- A copy
__gurg
to engulf, flood
exgurgito -- - tr. - verser, jeter dehors.
ingurgito -- to gorge, stuff, se, to be absorbed in, addict oneself to
egurgito -- to pour out, cast out, to lavish
__su
to lift up, raise, elevate, to cast up, swells, to stir up, rouse up, arouse, awaken, set in motion, encourage, incite, invoke, revive, rekindles, excite, invent
exsuscito -- to rouse from sleep, awaken
resuscito -- to revive, renew
__spic=spec
extispicium -- an inspection
extispicus -- c. extispex.
2800
__mund
cleanliness, neatness, elegance, fineness, neatness, elegance % cleanness, cleanliness
immunditia -- uncleanness, impurity, filth
immundities -- impureté, souillure.
__quil
inquilina -- une locataire.
inquilino -- to be an inhabitant, sojourner
__stit=sto
institoria -- Ulp. commerce, négoce.
institorium -- Suet. commerce, négoce.
__cap
to take in hand, take hold of, lay hold of, take, seize, grasp, seized their arms, contend in every way, had begun hostilities, was on the point of attacking, to take, partake of, To take captive, seize, make prisoner, could they not, when taken, be taken, To catch, hunt down, take, To win, captivate, charm, allure, enchain, enslave, fascinate, To cheat, seduce, deceive, mislead, betray, delude, catch, involved in, To defeat, convict, cast, overcome, To harm, lame, mutilate, maim, disable, impair, weaken, blind and deaf, loses an eye, P. pass, deprived of sense, silly, insane, crazed, lunatic, mad, To choose, select, elect, take, pick out, adopt, accept, make enemies, to occupy, choose, select, take possession of, enter into, to take up a position, for refuge, to be settling down on places selected, To take by force, capture, storm, reduce, conquer, seize, To reach, attain, arrive at, betake oneself to, to take, seize, wrest, receive, obtain, acquire, get, give and take, succeeded to, pecuniam, to take illegally, exact, extort, accept a bribe, take blackmail, To take, inherit, obtain, acquire, get, accept, To collect, receive, obtain, to take, seize, obtain, get, enjoy, reap, To take, assume, acquire, put on, To take, assume, adopt, cultivate, cherish, possess, To undertake, assume, enter upon, accept, take up, to obtain for, secure for, To begin, enter upon, undertake, war on a new plan, to take a start, fall asleep, was devised, To seize, embrace, take, To form, conceive, entertain, come to, reach, To take, derive, draw, obtain, To take, entertain, conceive, receive, be subjected to, suffer, experience, to seize, overcome, possess, occupy, affect, take possession of, move, to suffer, take, be subjected to, To take in, receive, hold, contain, be large enough for, will swallow up.&mdash;To contain, hold, suffice for, be strong enough for, bear, is too small for your glory, To take, receive, hold, comprehend, grasp, embrace % a capon
intercapio -- to take away
antecapio -- to obtain before, receive before:
concapio -- tr., prendre avec
__cin=can
intercino -- to sing between
supercino -- - intr. - chanter après; chanter en sus.
praecino -- to make music before, play at, had uttered an incantation, to make music before, be played at, to foretell, predict
concino -- to sound in concert, sing harmoniously, to agree, harmonize, accord, to sing, celebrate in song, magnify, To sing prophetically, prophesy
coccina -- scarlet garments#
coccinum -- c. coccum.
succino -- to sing to, accompany, another chimes in
succinum -- e??
porcina -- swine's flesh, pork#
occino -- to sing inauspiciously, croak, gives an unfavorable omen
accino -- to sing to, with
cocina -- - 1 - cuisine. - 2 - science culinaire, art de la cuisine.
cocino -- - intr. - faire la cuisine.
incino -- to cause to sound, strike up
recino -- to cause to echo, make to resound, repeat, re-echo, To repeat, celebrate, praise
sucinum -- amber#
acinum -- a small berry:#
acinus -- - 1 - petite baie ; grain de raisin. - 2 - baie du lierre, de la grenade, etc.#
ocinum -- an herb which serves for fodder, a sort of clover#
__fur
a fury, scourge, curse, witches, violent passion, rage, madness, fury, became furious, just wrath, The three goddesses of vengeance, Furies, driven mad by, Avenging spirits, tormenting spirits % to rage, rave, be out of one's mind, be mad, be furious, play the fool, be distracted, to be madly in love with, is madly eager, to rage, be furious % to drive mad, madden, infuriate
interfuro -- to rage between, through
praefuro -- to rage violently
perfuro -- to rage furiously, rage on
suffuror -- to steal secretly, to steal away, filch
defuro -- s'apaiser / être hors de soi
__ger
to bear about, bear, carry, wear, have, hold, sustain, became cows, with, contain, To bear, carry, bring, To bear, bring forth, produce, to bear, have, keep, entertain, cherish, experience, support a character, with dissimulation, To exhibit, display, assume, To carry out, administer, manage, regulate, rule, govern, conduct, carry on, wage, transact, accomplish, do, perform, to be in command, manage business, meanwhile, happen, the war, the action, for a successful blow, fights, exploits, public affairs, off the stage, gratify, please myself, every man to his humor, se, to bear, act, behave, deport oneself, remain neutral, claim to be, revere, treat you as myself, treat you thus
intergero -- to place between, interpose, insert
supergero -- - tr. - Apul. Col. entasser par-dessus, accumuler.
transgero -- tr., transporter
praegero -- - tr. - porter devant, présenter à.
congero -- to bring together, collect, heap up, throw together:
congeria -- that which is brought together;, a heap, pile, mass
progero -- to carry forth; to clear out; to carry before;
suggero -- to bring under, lay beneath, apply below, To throw up, with an earthen wall, To furnish, afford, supply, to assign, add, subjoin, supply, place next in order, were added.&mdash;To put on, impose upon, is to be imposed upon.&mdash;To suggest, prompt
suggera -- accomplissement
digero -- to force apart, separate, divide, distribute
ingero -- to throw in, pour in, heap upon
oggero -- to give; proffer;
adgero -- to heap/cover up over, to pile/build up, to erect; to accumulate; to intensify, exaggerate;
degero -- to carry away, carry off
obgero -- to proffer, bring, give
regero -- to carry back, bring back, throw back, throw again
egero -- ss??
egeries -- excrement, dung
__geri
intergeries -- a partition, party-wall#
congeries -- a heap, pile, mass, chaos, the ruins
digeries -- an orderly distribution, a disposition, arrangement*
__loc
to place, put, lay, set, dispose, arrange, to place, put, set, lay, fix, establish, constitute, consists in.&mdash;To place in marriage, give away, give in marriage, marry, To let, lease, hire, farm out, rant for pay, yielded.&mdash;To give out on contract, contract for making, have done by contract, To put out, place profitably % region, places (pl.); places connected with each other; % a place, spot % voir locus.
interloco -- to place between
praeloco -- to set, place before, to put first, foremost
colloco -- nection
abloco -- to lease out, let out on hire*
obloco -- to let out*
reloco -- To bring a thing back to its former place, to, replace
eloco -- to let, farm out*
__luc
to be light, be clear, shine, beam, glow, glitter, glimmered, shall burn, transparent, it is light, is day, dawns, to shine forth, be conspicuous, be apparent, be clear, be evident % a sacred grove, consecrated wood, park surrounding a temple, A wood, grove % to begin to shine, dawn, it grows light here, at dawn, at break of day
interluceo -- to shine in the midst
interlucesco -- to shine through
interluco -- to let the light through, to lop, thin
superluceo -- to shine
transluceo -- to shine through, glimmer through
praeluceo -- to shine before, shed light upon
colluceo -- to shine brightly, light up (with fire); to reflect light, shine, be lit up; to glitter;
collucesco -- to lighten up
colluco -- to make light, to clear, thin a forest
perluceo -- to shine through, glimmer
subluceo -- to shine a little, gleam faintly, glimmer
subluco -- to trim, cut away, thin out*
traluceo -- To shine across
proluceo -- to shine forth
dilucesco -- to grow light, begin to shine, dawn
diluceo -- to be clear, be evident
reluceo -- to shine back, shine out, blaze, shine, glow
relucesco -- to grow bright again, clear
illucesco -- to begin to dawn;
illuceo -- to shine in, on, to light up, illuminate, give light
illucisco -- 
adluceo -- to shine upon
obluceo -- - intr. - Fulg. briller devant.
alucus -- hibou, chat-huant.#
eluceo -- to shine out, shine forth, gleam
elucesco -- to shine forth, begin to shine, to dawn, Impers.
elucus -- a drowsy, dreaming person#
__lud
a gladiator's wife % to play, play at a game, with his cash-box staked, To play, appear in a public game, To play, sport, frisk, frolic, dance, to sport, play, practise as a pastime, do for amusement, To play, make music, compose, To sport, dally, wanton, To play, mock, mimic, take off, imitate serious business in sport, To make game of, ridicule, rally, banter, To delude, deceive, am in earnest, gave deceptive responses.&mdash;To baffle, elude % a play, game, diversion, pastime, public games, plays, spectacles, shows, exhibitions, A place for exercise, place for practice, school, in training, Play, sport, child's play, Sport, jest, joke, fun, how you made yourself ridiculous, play tricks on, A play, entertaining exhibition, playful writing, satire % les Taurilies, les jeux Tauriens (fêtes en l'honneur des dieux infernaux).
interludo -- to play between, together
anteludium -- a prelude
praeludo -- to play beforehand, to prelude, rehearse
colludium -- A sporting, playing together
colludo -- to play, sport together, play with
proludium -- preliminary exercise, training
proludo -- to play beforehand, prelude, practise
perludo -- to play about
alludo -- to frolic/play/sport around/with, to play against; to jest, make mocking allusion to;
illudo -- to mock, ridicule, speak mockingly of; to fool, dupe; to use for sexual pleasure;
illudia -- illusions*
illudio -- Gell. c. illudo.
2900
illudium -- a mockery
abludo -- to play out of tune.
adludio -- jouer avec.
deludo -- to play false, mock, deceive, make sport of, delude
diludium -- a resting-time, intermission.&mdash;Plur
obludo -- To play off jokes
reludo -- to jest, jeer at, to banter
eludo -- to stop playing, cease to sport
__mane
to stay, remain, abide, tarry, To stay, tarry, stop, abide, pass the night, To remain, last, endure, continue, abide, persist, abide by, remain alive, adhere to, fulfil, abide by, would thou hadst kept thy word, be it a settled principle, abiding, go on, To stay for, await, expect, the end of the play, To await, be about to befall, be destined to, are in reserve % to flow, run, trickle, drop, drip, To be drenched, flow, drip, overflow, To give out, shed, pour forth, distil, distil poetic honey, To flow, extend, be diffused, spread, to extend, be diffused, spread, get abroad, To flow, spring, arise, proceed, emanate, take origin, originate, To escape, be forgotten % a hand, lay down, refrained, with great care, outgrew the rod, liberally, by careful nursing, by the assistance, from hand to hand, might, arrests.&mdash;The hand, close upon us, at hand, at close quarters, within reach, as private secretary, ready money, accessible, plain and palpable, palpable proofs, close to, am engaged on, is not read, paid attentions to, by manual labor, bodily, by your hand, artificially, under my control, rests with you, I could not determine, subject, suffered to escape, while they had the opportunity, with might and main, forcibly, a drawn battle, a blow, turn a hand, try conclusions, fight, brave in battle, by force, stormed, by suicide, actual fight, compulsion, give himself up, yielded, consented, to supplicate, finish, skilled hands, the work is finished.&mdash;A hand, handwriting, style, work, workmanship, the comparative skill, A side, a hand, trunk, claw, claws, grappling-hooks, grappling-irons, A body, band, company, host, collection, troop, corps, force, the Centaurs, labor, hands, workmen % a handful % madness
intermaneo -- to remain between
/intermano -- int., couler entre
permaneo -- to stay, hold out, last, continue, abide, be permanent, endure, remain, persist, persevere
/permano -- to flow to, penetrate, reach
/permanasco -- to flow to;, to penetrate to
commaneo -- to remain somewhere constantly
/promano -- int., s'écouler, s'étendre
/summano -- - 1 - intr. - couler sous. - 2 - tr. - Plaut. arroser (c. Summanus).
/demano -- to flow down, glide down
remaneo -- to stay behind, be left, remain
/remano -- to flow back
admaneo -- rester auprès.
/dimano -- to spread abroad
immaneo -- to remain in
immania -- des choses monstrueuses, prodigieuses#
obmaneo -- - intr. - P. Fest. attendre.
__man
/intermaneo -- to remain between
intermano -- int., couler entre
/permaneo -- to stay, hold out, last, continue, abide, be permanent, endure, remain, persist, persevere
permano -- to flow to, penetrate, reach
permanasco -- to flow to;, to penetrate to
/commaneo -- to remain somewhere constantly
promano -- int., s'écouler, s'étendre
summano -- - 1 - intr. - couler sous. - 2 - tr. - Plaut. arroser (c. Summanus).
demano -- to flow down, glide down
/remaneo -- to stay behind, be left, remain
remano -- to flow back
/admaneo -- rester auprès.
dimano -- to spread abroad
/immaneo -- to remain in
/immania -- des choses monstrueuses, prodigieuses
/obmaneo -- - intr. - P. Fest. attendre.
__nec
to kill, slay, put to death, destroy
internecies -- slaughter, death, destruction
internecium -- slaughter, death, destruction
interneco -- to kill, destroy
perneco -- to kill, slay outright
conneco -- tuer avec ou ensemble
__nite
to shine, look bright, glitter, glisten % to bear upon, press upon, lean, support oneself, strive to rise, strut, on their knees, To make way, press forward, advance, mount, climb, fly, struggle, To strain in giving birth, bring forth, am in labor, to strive, put forth exertion, make an effort, labor, endeavor, To contend, insist, To rest, rely, depend upon
interniteo -- to shine through, shine at intervals
praeniteo -- to shine in preference, be more attractive
perniteo -- to shine very much
reniteo -- to shine back, flash
__nit
connitor -- to put forth all one's strength, strive, struggle, endeavor
pernities -- - 1 - destruction, ruine, perte. - 2 - personne ou chose funeste, fléau, peste. - 3 - danger, malheur; maladie; accident.#
adnitor -- to lean against, lean upon:
annitor -- to press upon, against, to lean upon;, ad
innitor -- to lean upon, support oneself by
obnitor -- to bear upon, press against, struggle with, strain at
renitor -- to strive against, withstand, resist
__nod
a knot, clasping him as in a knot, look for a knot in a bulrush, make difficulties, a joint, eye, A star in the constellation Pisces, a band, bond, A bond, obligation, A knotty point, difficulty, impediment, crisis % a plant, also called % to furnish with knots, tie in a knot, enchained
internodium -- the space between two joints
connodo -- - tr. - unir ensemble.
abnodo -- to cut off knots;, to clear, of knots
adnodo -- to cut off knots, to cut away suckers, shoots of the vine, abnodo.
annodo -- to cut off knots, to cut away suckers, shoots of the vine, abnodo.
innodo -- to fasten with a knot.
renodo -- to bind back, tie behind in a knot
denodo -- - tr. - dénouer.
dinodo -- - tr. - dénouer.
__ped
to break wind; % a footstep % a shepherd's crook, sheephook
interpedio -- to hinder, impede
praepedio -- to entangle, shackle, fetter, To hinder, embarrass, obstruct, impede, hamper themselves, stammering, hindered from
compedio -- to shackle, fetter; to put fetters on;
perpedio -- to hinder, impede
expedio -- to extricate, disengage, let loose, set free, liberate, make my way, make room, To fetch out, bring forward, procure, make ready, prepare, exercise, To despatch, hurl, to bring out, extricate, release, free, help through, To put in order, arrange, set right, adjust, settle, pay, To explain, unfold, make clear, clear up, disclose, relate, could sooner recount, To be serviceable, be profitable, be advantageous, be useful, be expedient, profit
impedio -- to entangle, ensnare, shackle, hamper, hinder, hold fast, To clasp, bind, encircle, embrace, bridle, encircle, To block up, make inaccessible, to entangle, embarrass, To be in the way, hinder, detain, obstruct, check, prevent, impede, interposes a veto
repedo -- to go, step back, to turn back, retreat, recoil
__ped (pēd)
impedo -- to prop, support
oppedo -- to break wind at, deride, mock, insult
suppedo -- to break wind softly
__pol
to smooth, furbish, polish % an end of an axis, pole % the dung of an ass's foal % a strong-smelling plant, poley-germander % a precious stone of a gray color
interpolo -- to polish, furbish, dress up, dye anew, to interpolate, alter, falsify
praepolio -- - tr. - polir d'avance.
dispolio -- to plunder, spoil utterly
perpolio -- to polish thoroughly, finish, make perfect
propola -- a forestaller, retailer, huckster
expolio -- to smooth, polish, finish, adorn, embellish, refine, elaborate
depolio -- to smooth off, polish off
repolio -- to clean again
__qui
to rest, repose, keep quiet, be inactive, be at peace, get no rest, do nothing, does not play, which we might easily have been spared, To rest, sleep, be asleep, to be inactive, make no movement, To keep in retirement, take no part, be neutral, To acquiesce, quietly permit, To pause, make a pause, keep silence, be still, To rest, lie still, be still, be quiet, be undisturbed, lay fallow, ceases to burn, the waves are laid, are silent, To be calm, be unruffled, be composed, to be inactive, be powerless
interquiesco -- to rest awhile, pause
conquiesco -- to find rest, rest, repose, be idle, be inactive:
perquiesco -- to rest all through, to spend in rest
requiesco -- to rest, take rest, repose
inquiesco -- - intr. - inquiéter, troubler.
__rig=reg
to be stiff, be numb, stiffen, To be stiff, be rigid, stand on end, bristle, stand erect, hardened into gold, stand out, To stand stiff, stand upright, rise % to conduct, guide, turn % to grow stiff, be benumbed, stiffen, harden, bristled up % well-watered places % ligne, raie
interrigo -- tr., arroser entre
/praerigesco -- to become very stiff
porrigo -- to stretch out, spread out, put forth, reach out, extend, by raising hands, extends, lengthen, To lay at length, stretch out, To hold forth, reach out, extend, offer, present, hand, present his head to the marriage halter, manūs, to reach after, strive for, seek to obtain, se, to extend, reach, grow, To prolong, extend
corrigo -- to make straight, set right, bring into order, smoothed out, to improve, amend, correct, reform, restore, make up for, make the best of it
corrigia -- a shoe-tie, shoe-latchet*
corrigium -- c. corrigia.
proriga -- a stable-boy, an attendant employed in breeding horses#
subrigo -- to erect, make rigid, straighten up, directed upwards
surrigo -- I. Act., to lift or raise up, to raise, erect, elevate II. Neutr., to rise, arise, to get up, stand up
/derigesco -- to become stiff, grow rigid, fix, curdle (only
derigo -- to lay straight, set straight, arrange, lay out, To draw up, form, To direct, send, aim, drive, steer, to aim, direct, discharge, to direct, guide, define, limit, regulate, points the way
/derigeo -- to remove hardness, to soften
dirigo -- to distribute, scatter, To lay out, arrange in lines, the rows of houses
/dirigeo -- c. derigesco.
/dirigesco -- - intr. - 1 - devenir raide, devenir immobile. - 2 - se glacer (en parl. du sang).
irrigo -- to water/irrigate; to inundate/flood; to refresh; to wet/moisten; to diffuse, shed*
irrigua -- Overflowings*
adrigo -- to set up, raise, erect, to rouse, encourage, animate, excite, prick up, attentive
obrigeo -- - intr. - Paulin. être rigide.
obrigesco -- to stiffen, become stiff
erigo -- to raise up, lift, set up, erect, elevate, lead up, build, stop, to rise, rising, springs up, tells of their transformation, to arouse, excite, stir, instigate, animate, To raise up, cheer, encourage, we take courage
origa -- c. auriga.
__rige
/interrigo -- tr., arroser entre
praerigesco -- to become very stiff
/porrigo -- to stretch out, spread out, put forth, reach out, extend, by raising hands, extends, lengthen, To lay at length, stretch out, To hold forth, reach out, extend, offer, present, hand, present his head to the marriage halter, manūs, to reach after, strive for, seek to obtain, se, to extend, reach, grow, To prolong, extend
/corrigo -- to make straight, set right, bring into order, smoothed out, to improve, amend, correct, reform, restore, make up for, make the best of it
/corrigia -- a shoe-tie, shoe-latchet*
/corrigium -- c. corrigia.
/proriga -- a stable-boy, an attendant employed in breeding horses#
/subrigo -- to erect, make rigid, straighten up, directed upwards
/surrigo -- I. Act., to lift or raise up, to raise, erect, elevate II. Neutr., to rise, arise, to get up, stand up
derigesco -- to become stiff, grow rigid, fix, curdle (only
/derigo -- to lay straight, set straight, arrange, lay out, To draw up, form, To direct, send, aim, drive, steer, to aim, direct, discharge, to direct, guide, define, limit, regulate, points the way
derigeo -- to remove hardness, to soften
/dirigo -- to distribute, scatter, To lay out, arrange in lines, the rows of houses
dirigeo -- c. derigesco.
dirigesco -- - intr. - 1 - devenir raide, devenir immobile. - 2 - se glacer (en parl. du sang).
/irrigo -- to water/irrigate; to inundate/flood; to refresh; to wet/moisten; to diffuse, shed*
/irrigua -- Overflowings*
/adrigo -- to set up, raise, erect, to rouse, encourage, animate, excite, prick up, attentive
obrigeo -- - intr. - Paulin. être rigide.
obrigesco -- to stiffen, become stiff
/erigo -- to raise up, lift, set up, erect, elevate, lead up, build, stop, to rise, rising, springs up, tells of their transformation, to arouse, excite, stir, instigate, animate, To raise up, cheer, encourage, we take courage
/origa -- c. auriga.
__sep=saep
- to surround/envelop/enfold/encircle; to clothe/cover/protect; to close/seal off; to shut - to hedge/fence in, surround (w/hedge/wall/fence/barrier/troops); to enclose; % the cuttle-fish, ink-fish
praesepe -- - 1 - toute espèce d'enceinte ou d'enclos; étable, parc à moutons, écurie; qqf. râtelier, mangeoire, crèche. - 2 - habitation, logis, habitation, demeure. - 3 - maison où l'on mange, maison où l'on dîne, table. - 4 - lieu de débauche, mauvais lieu.
praesepia -- c. praesepe.
praesepio -- to fence in front, to block up, barricade
praesepium -- c. praesepe.
consepio -- to fence round, hedge in
3000
dissepio -- to part off, to separate, divide
obsepio -- to hedge, fence in, to enclose;, to close up, to render impassable, inaccessible
__saep
intersaepio -- to fence about, hedge in, stop up, enclose, secure
__tal
an ankle, ankle-bone, pasternbone, knuckle-bone, The heel, succeeds or fails, A die % a slender staff, rod, stick, stake, bar, iron rods
intertaleo -- to cut out between, to cut by lopping off both ends
intertalio -- - tr. - couper [un surgeon].
retalio -- to retaliate*
__rep
to creep, crawl, grovelling, mean % to feed, nourish again
introrepo -- to creep in
prorepo -- to creep forth, crawl out
subrepo -- to creep under, steal into
correpo -- to creep, slink to a place, to creep, creep
perrepo -- to crawl over
surrepo -- to creep under, to creep, steal along, creep softly on, steal upon, to come on unawares, insensibly, by degrees
obrepo -- to creep up, approach stealthily, steal upon, come suddenly upon, surprise
adrepo -- to creep to, steal up:
inrepo -- to creep in, slip in, be stealthily inserted, steal in
derepo -- to crawl down, sneak down
erepo -- to crawl over, make a way out of
__uoc
to call, summon, invoke, call together, convoke, announces, declare war, To call upon, invoke, appeal to, invoking, as witnesses, call down, to cite, summon, to bid, invite, ask, for sending invitations, To call, invite, exhort, summon, urge, stimulate, To challenge, defy, To call by name, name, denominate, designate, entitle, names after, To call, bring, draw, put, set, place, succeeded to a share, refer, bring to trial, I call to account, threaten with ruin, to invite, call, summon, incite, arouse
introuoco -- to call in
conuoco -- to call together, convoke, assemble, summon
conuocium -- mélange de voix, de cris [mot forgé pour l'explication de convicium].*
prouoco -- to call forth, call out, summon
aduoco -- to call, summon, invite:
deuoco -- to call off, call away, recall
inuoco -- to call upon, invoke, appeal to
reuoco -- to call again, call back, recall
seuoco -- to call apart, lead aside, summon away, withdraw
auoco -- to call off, call away:
euoco -- to call out, call forth, summon, evoke
__tic=tac
obticentia -- a pause, sudden break*
reticentia -- a keeping silent, silence, reticence, for suppressing the truth, an abrupt pause
__oen
oenophorium -- a wine-basket
oenophorum -- a wine-holder, wine-basket of unknown shape
oenophorus -- a wine-holder, wine-basket of unknown shape; Oenophorus, f. : the wine-carrier, a female statue of Praxiteles
__ol
olfactoria -- a nosegay, bouquet
olfactorium -- a nosegay, smelling-bottle
__pigner
to give as a pledge, pledge, pawn, mortgage, pawn, to pledge, had their minds under bonds % to take as a pledge, accept as earnest, To lay claim to, appropriate
oppignero -- to give as a pledge, pledge, pawn
repignero -- to redeem a pledge
__oxycomin
oxycomina -- pickled olives
oxycominum -- sorte d'olives
__bacch
to celebrate the festival of Bacchus, rave like Bacchae, revel, exult, roams in frenzy, runs wild, raising the cry of Bacchus, frequented by the revels, with vine-clad hills, holding revelry % - intr. - se livrer à la débauche. % a kind of drinking vessel, a goblet, bowl
perbacchor -- to carouse, revel through
debacchor -- to rave, revel wildly
__egrin
peregrinor -- to sojourn in a strange land, be an alien, travel about, to go abroad, travel about, roam, wander, roam through all infinity.&mdash;To be abroad, be a stranger, sojourn
peregrina -- a foreign woman
peregrino -- int., c. peregrinor
__grand
to become great, grow % Act., to make great, increase, enlarge, to become great, to grow
pergrandesco -- to grow very large
ingrandesco -- to grow big, increase
__popul
to lay waste, ravage, devastate, spoil, plunder, pillage, To destroy, ruin, spoil % to lay waste, ravage, plunder, pillage, spoil, To destroy, ruin, spoil, mutilated, robbed of the bait
perpopulor -- to lay waste utterly, devastate, pillage completely
depopulor -- to lay waste, ravage, plunder, pillage
depopulo -- - tr. - ravager, saccager, piller, dévaster.
__rog
to ask eagerly, inquire persistently, keep asking
perrogito -- to ask through in succession, to ask one after another
derogito -- to ask urgently
erogito -- to find out by asking, to inquire
__scrut
to ransack, search carefully, examine thoroughly, explore, search, examine, to examine thoroughly, inquire into, explore, investigate, To search into, search out, find out, read % old, broken stuff, trash, frippery, trumpery % c. scrutor.
perscruto -- c. perscrutor
perscrutor -- to search through, examine, scrutinize
inscrutor -- to search, examine into
__son
personata -- a kind of large burdock#
obsonatus -- catering; marketing;#
__tol
to bear, endure, support, sustain, suffer, they might hold out, To support, nourish, maintain, sustain, preserve % to bear, support, sustain
pertolero -- to bear out, endure
attolero -- to bear, support
intolero -- not to bear, not to suffer, to take ill
__porc
a kind of artichoke, a native of the island of Cinara
porcinarium -- a pigsty
porcinarius -- a porkseller
__port
porticula -- a small gallery
porticulus -- c. porticula
reticulus -- c. reticulum, i, n.#
__hiem
to winter, pass the winter, keep winter-quarters, take up quarters for the winter, To be wintry, be frozen, be stormy, storms
posthiemat -- Plin. l'hiver est tardif.
perhiemo -- to winter, pass the winter; to lie, remain all winter
__icul#
posticula -- a little backdoor
anicula -- a little old woman, granny
amicula -- a loved one, mistress
amiculus -- a pet friend, crony
__ulat#
postulatum -- a demand, request, claim, to formulate
ambulatus -- walking
__carp=cerp
to pick, pluck, pluck off, cull, crop, gather, To take, as nourishment, crop, pluck off, browse, graze on, pick dainties, To tear off, tear away, pluck off, pull out, to spin, to pull off, to pluck, snatch, to snatch, To enjoy, seize, use, make use of, redeem, To gnaw at, tear, blame, censure, carp at, slander, calumniate, revile, To weaken, enfeeble, wear away, consume, destroy, to obscure the fame of, to in, flict injury upon, weaken, harass, To cut to pieces, divide, To take apart, single out, To go, tread upon, pass over, navigate, sail through, take one's way, to go in a circle % Cass. carpe.
praecarpo -- To pluck, break off, gather before, before the time
encarpa -- festoons of fruit*
__cent=can
praecento -- to utter incantations before
concentus -- a concert, symphony, harmony, harmonious music, A choir, chorus of singers, concord, agreement, harmony, unanimity
discentia -- a learning
succentus -- an accompanying, accompaniment
occento -- to satirize in song, lampoon
occentus -- a singing, a cry
accentus -- 1 - accent, son d'une syllabe. 2 - quantité d'une syllabe. 3 - son; son des flûtes. 4 - accentuation, augmentation. 5 - méd. paroxysme.
__dec
decentia -- comeliness, decency
__recent=recens
recentor -- to renew itself
__cerp=carp
praecerpo -- to pluck beforehand, gather prematurely, to take away, lessen, diminish
concerpo -- to tear in pieces, rend
discerpo -- to tear in pieces, rend, mangle, mutilate, scatter, treat in fragments
decerpo -- to pluck off, tear away, break off, pluck, crop, gather, snatch, to pluck off, take away, drawn, detract.&mdash;To enjoy
excerpo -- to pick out, extract, to pick out, choose, select, gather, To take out, leave out, except, omit
__cond
to make savory, season, spice, concoct, To make fragrant, To embalm, to cultivate, ornament, season, spice, soften, temper, to set off, to mitigate, more amiable % to put together, make by joining, found, establish, build, settle, before the foundation of Rome, they settle, To erect, make, construct, build, found, To compose, write, celebrate, treat, describe, To establish, found, be the author of, produce, make, To put away, lay by, lay up, store, treasure, to imprison, safe, To preserve, pickle, To inter, bury, things blasted, recorded, to bury, dispose of, to complete, close, To conceal, hide, secrete, suppress, make away with, sheathe, shut, retire, place in ambush, To strike deep, plunge, bury % to learn well, learn thoroughly: % one who lays up
praecondio -- to season beforehand, med.
abscondo -- to put out of sight, hide, conceal:*
decondo -- to secrete
excondo -- to form, exhibit*
__crud
to increase in violence, be aggravated, grow worse
praecrudesco -- to grow very hard
incrudesco -- to become very raw
recrudesco -- to become raw again, break open afresh
__damn
to adjudge guilty, condemn, convict, believe him guilty, decided unfavorably, by public opinion, will condemn and drag home, if convicted, To sentence, doom, mulcted, prosecuted by P., and fined, bound by the will, To condemn, blame, disapprove, reject, the evidence of, To consecrate, devote, condemn as a sacrifice, voti, votis, to grant, prayer % hurt, harm, damage, injury, loss, after your ruin, misfortunes, suffered, to put up with, suffered, defeats, natural defect, has nothing to lose, A lost object, her stolen brood, A fine, mulct, penalty, damage wrongfully done, trespass, not suffered, threatened, to give security against loss
praedamno -- to condemn beforehand
perdamno -- - tr. - condamner.
dedamno -- to absolve, acquit
__dulc
to become sweet; % - intr. - P.-Nol. être doux. % agreeable, delightful, pleasant, charming, soft, flattering. % to sweeten
praedulcia -- over-sweet things
condulco -- to sweeten
3100
indulco -- to make sweet, to sweeten
indulceo -- to become very sweet
addulco -- - tr. - adoucir.
obdulcesco -- to become sweet
obdulco -- to sweeten, make sweet, med.
edulco -- to sweeten
__elig
to pluck out, root out, to root out, To pick out, choose, elect, select, single out, have a preference for, from many authors, makes a true selection
praeeligo -- to choose rather, to prefer;, object-clause
subeligo -- to choose further
__gign
to produce, give birth to, beget, bear, bring forth, son of, to produce, occasion, cause, begin, spring, grow, arise, are created, to have a beginning
praegigno -- v. progigno
progigno -- to beget, bear, bring forth
ingigno -- to instil by birth or nature, to implant, engender;
regigno -- to beget, bear again, to reproduce
egigno -- to procreate, produce, bring forth
__gnat=gign
daughter;
praegnatus -- -I. pregnancy -II. pregnant
cognata -- a female relation, kinswoman
__long
- tr. - Diom. allonger. % to become long, to become faint, weak, languid % - tr. - 1 - prolonger (le temps). - 2 - Arn. éloigner, tenir éloigner.
praelongo -- to lengthen out very much, to make very long
prolongo -- to lengthen, prolong, extend
elongo -- Act., to remove, keep aloof
__lumb
a loin
praelumbo -- to make lame in the loins, hipshot
delumbo -- to enervate, weaken
__columb
columba -- a dove, pigeon
columbus -- a male dove, cockpigeon
columbor -- to bill, kiss like doves
__merc
to trade, traffic, deal in, buy, purchase, for Thais, to be purchased with life, would pay highly for % 
praemercor -- to buy before, beforehand, should forestall the markets
commercium -- commercial intercourse, trade, traffic, commerce, The right to trade, mercantile intercourse, privilege of traffic, Intercourse, communication, corres pondence, with the commonalty, correspondence, communion, fellowship, treaties
commercior -- to trade
commercor -- to buy up, purchase:
promercium -- trade, traffic, merchandise
__merg
to dip, dip in, immerse, plunge, sink, bury, bathe, To engulf, swallow up, overwhelm, To plunge, thrust, drive, bury, To cover, bury, hide, to plunge, sink, overwhelm, cover, bury, immerse, ruin, brought to a painful death, drags down, overwhelmed with prosperity, buried in drunken sleep, swallowed up, sinking his capital, to utter distress % a diver % Gloss. plongeon (oiseau). % a two-pronged pitchfork
praemergo -- tr., plonger auparavant
submergo -- to dip, plunge under, sink, overwhelm, submerge
commergo -- plonger ensemble.
promergo -- int., poindre, apparaître
demergo -- to sink, submerge, plunge, dip, immerse, bury
immergo -- to dip, plunge, sink, immerse, submerge
remergo -- to dip in, immerse again;
__mord
to bite, bite into, bit into, taste, bit the dust, To eat, devour, consume, To bite into, take hold of, catch fast, clasps, To cut into, wash away, To nip, bite, sting, to bite, sting, pain, hurt, a biting jest, shall be vexed, feel the sting of conscience
praemordeo -- to bite off, snip off
commordeo -- to bite sharply, eagerly
admordeo -- to bite at, gnaw, to bite into
demordeo -- to bite off
obmordeo -- to bite around
remordeo -- to bite again, strike back, attack in return
__mulce
to stroke, graze, touch lightly, fondle, rustle through, to move, to soothe, soften, caress, flatter, delight, To relieve, alleviate % to beat, cudgel, maltreat, handle roughly, injure, would have disabled
praemulceo -- - tr. - passer doucement la main sur.
permulceo -- to rub gently, stroke, touch gently; to charm, please, beguile; to soothe, alleviate;
commulceo -- to caress, coax, soothe much.
promulceo -- v. promulsus.
demulceo -- to stroke down, stroke caressingly
remulceo -- to stroke back, fold back, curve
admulceo -- to stroke, ca. ress
__mulc
promulcum -- a tow-rope
remulcum -- a tow-rope
remulco -- ins Schlepptau nehmen, bugsieren
commulco -- to beat violently
__narr
to make known, tell, relate, narrate, report, recount, set forth, of the narrative, tell bad news, To say, speak, tell, recite, mention, describe, describe
praenarro -- to tell beforehand
pernarro -- to narrate completely
denarro -- to tell, relate, narrate
renarro -- to tell over again, recount, relate
adnarro -- dabei erzählen
__nunc
ly
praenuncio -- to announce, publish beforehand, to foretell, foreshow, predict;, de, object-clause
pronuncio -- to make publicly known, to publish, proclaim, announce
annuncio -- to announce, make known, relate, proclaim
annuncius -- that announces, makes known
denuncio -- to give an official intimation, to make an official announcement, declaration of one's intentions, to announce, intimate, declare, ut, to intimate, order, command
obnuncio -- To tell, report, announce
renuncio -- To bring, carry back word, to report, give notice, declare, announce.
__opin
to be of opinion, suppose, imagine, conjecture, deem, believe, think, judge, am sure of it % (anteclass.) v. opinor
praeopinor -- penser d'avance.
adopinor -- to think, suppose, conjecture further
inopinor -- to suppose, think, opine
__pand
praepando -- to open, spread before, to spread out, extend
dispando -- to stretch out, spread out, to extend, expand
expando -- to spread out, spread apart, to expand
oppando -- to spread, stretch out against, before, to spread out
repando -- to open again, throw open
__sicc
to make dry, dry, dry up, To dry up, drain, make dry, parched, To exhaust, drain dry, milk, empty, wrung out, To dry up, heal up, stanch % to grow, become dry, to dry up % dry land, a dry place; dry places
praesicco -- to dry beforehand
subsicco -- - tr. - Pelag. sécher un peu.
adsicco -- to dry, to dry up, siccare
assiccesco -- to become dry, to dry up
desicco -- to dry up, to desiccate
exsiccesco -- to dry up, become quite dry
exsicco -- to dry up, make dry
resicco -- - tr. - Pl.-Val. sécher de nouveau.
__stig
praestigia -- prestiges, artifices, jongleries, tours de main, illusions, fourberies.
praestigiae -- deceptions, illusions, sleights, jugglery, trickery, tricks of words, secretly
praestigio -- to deceive by juggling tricks
praestigior -- to practise sleight of hand
praestigium -- a delusion, illusion, trick
instigo -- to goad on, urge, stimulate, stir, set on, incite, instigate, at your instigation*
__stin
praestino -- to buy, purchase
destino -- to make fast, make firm, bind, fix, stay, to fix in mind, determine, resolve, design, assign, devote, appoint, appropriate, fix their minds on him as, detailed, he has determined, To select, mean to choose, meant to buy.&mdash;To appoint, fix upon, designate, To fix upon, aim at
destina -- a support, stay, prop
sustineo -- to hold up, hold upright, uphold, bear up, keep up, support, sustain, to stand, To hold back, keep in, stay, check, restrain, control, refrain, to uphold, sustain, maintain, preserve, characters, To furnish with means of support, nourish, sustain, support, maintain, To bear, undergo, endure, tolerate, hold out, withstand, sustain the conflict longer, presumed, To hold in, stop, stay, check, restrain, keep back, avoided, To put off, defer, delay
obstineo -- tr., montrer
obstino -- to resolve, determine, be firmly resolved, persist
__tang
to touch, to border on, be contiguous to, adjoin, reach, To touch, take, take away, carry off, To taste, partake of, eat, drink, To reach, arrive at, come to, To touch, strike, hit, beat, to affect, be put to death, struck by lightning, to take hold of, touch, handle, To besprinkle, mositen, wash, smear, dye, to touch, reach, move, affect, impress, To take in, trick, dupe, cozen, cheat, To sting, nettle, wound, To touch upon, mention, speak of, refer to, be discussed, To take in hand, undertake
praetango -- to touch beforehand, previously
pertango -- to touch all over, to baste well
retango -- to touch again, repeatedly
__tard
to make slow, hinder, delay, retard, impede, check, stay, prevent, check, whether I ought to linger % to become slow % säumen, zögern
praetardo -- - tr. - retarder beaucoup.
intardo -- to stay, abide, part. pass. subst.
retardo -- Act., to keep back, hinder, delay, detain, impede, retard
__test
to cause to testify, call as a witness, invoke, appeal to, you may cite me as avowing it, To make known, show, prove, demonstrate, declare, aver, assert, bear witness to, To publish a testament, make a will, provide by will % Pass., pass. % a vessel or lid % a piece of burned clay, brick, tile, A piece of baked earthen-ware, earthen vessel, pot, pitcher, jug, urn, a lamp, A broken piece of earthen-ware, brick, sherd, potsherd, a sherd used in voting, potsherd as a ballot, castanets, bits of bone struck together by dancers, A shell, hard covering, a covering of ice, A shell-fish
praetestor -- to bear witness to beforehand
contestor -- to call to witness, invoke, appeal to
3200
protesto -- to declare in public, to bear witness, testify, protest, object-clause
protestor -- - 1 - affirmer hautement, déclarer publiquement. - 2 - attester, prouver.
detestor -- to curse, execrate, abominate
detesto -- to execrate
obtestor -- to call as a witness, protest, make appeal to
attestor -- to prove, confirm
__ting
to wet, moisten, bathe, dip, imbue, bathe, will set, entertain, To soak in color, dye, color, imbue, tinge, to imbue, tincture, furnish % to wet/moisten/dip/soak; to color/dye/tinge/tint, stain (w/blood); to imbue; to impregnate;
praetingo -- to dip in, moisten beforehand
continguo -- to wet, moisten
obtingo -- to fall to the lot of, befall, occur, had fallen to your lot.&mdash;To happen, befall, occur, should befall*
adtingo -- to wipe/smear on?;
attinguo -- to moisten, to sprinkle with a liquid
intingo -- to dip, soak
intinguo -- to dip in.
__ting1=tang
contingo -- to touch, reach, take hold of, seize, scorch, to meddle with, stand close together, taste, To touch, adjoin, border on, reach, extend to, To reach, attain, come to, arrive at, meet with, strike, to come into the air, to hit, to touch, seize upon, affect, seized, I felt, To be connected with, be related to, touch, concern, have more ready access to, concerns not, To pollute, stain, defile, infest, taint, corrupt, P. perf, To attain, reach, arrive at, To happen, befall, fall out, come, take place, turn out, come to pass, occur, he had a respectable fortune, has the luck
distinguo -- to separate, divide, part
pertingo -- to reach, extend
__tond
to shear, clip, crop, shave, the barber, with hair clipped short, L.&mdash;To crop, lop, prune, trim, was cropping, To mow, reap, after harvest, To crop, graze, browse upon, pluck, gather, cull, To fleece, plunder
praetondeo -- to clip in front
detondeo -- to shear off, cut off, clip, shear
attondeo -- to shave, shear, to prune, to crop, depreciated
intondeo -- to clip off
__uerb
a word, speaks, had spoken, in a word, names, abusive language, choice of language, much talk on both sides, in three words, the praetor's voice, that is idle talk, sing. adverb., briefly, in one word, by a word, at one word from me.&mdash;Orally, by speech, plur, poss. pron, in the name of, in behalf of, for, for me, in one word, in a word, briefly, precisely, exactly, literally, literally, word for word, for the sake of example, for example, for instance, A saying, expression, phrase, sentence, an old saying, Mere talk, mere words, empty words, adv., verbally, in words, nominally, in name, to give mere words, deceive, cheat, to beguile, a verb
praeuerbium -- a preposition
prouerbium -- an old saying, saw, maxim, adage, proverb
aduerbium -- an adverb, verbis adicitur
deuerbium -- dialogue (dans les pièces de théâtre).
diuerbium -- a dialogue, colloquy
__castr
a military camp, encampment (regularly a square surrounded by a trench, and a wall with four gates): stativa, permanent: % to emasculate, Iu., Cu.&mdash; Fig., to enervate: % a fortified place, castle, fort, fortress
procastria -- v. procestria.
excastro -- c. castro
incastro -- tr., emboîter, enchâsser, encastrer
__leg
an ambassador, legate, A deputy, lieutenant, lieutenant-general, an imperial legate, governor of a province % ambassadrice [fig.]. % a bequest, legacy
prolegatus -- a lieutenant-governor's substitute, a prolegate
adlegati -- deputies
delegatum -- délégation.
elegatus -- an unknown kind of fish#
__tub
aufschwellen
protubero -- to swell, bulge out, to grow forth
extubero -- (Lebaigue P. 477 et P. 478) - intr. - 1 - s'enfler, se gonfler, s'élever. - 2 - Pall. être saillant, faire saillie. - 1 - tr. - faire enfler, bomber.
__puru
purulentia -- a collection of corrupt matter, pus, a purulent mass
purulenta -- corrupt matter, pus
__cent=recens
recentaria -- marchande de vin à la glace (
recentarius -- a vender of wine which has been cooled, made fresh, fem.
__opt=op
to take by choice, select, choose, adopt:
red.ad.opto -- to adopt anew, to readopt
re.ad.opto -- - tr. - adopter de nouveau.
__ipi=api
redipiscor -- to get again, to regain, recover
adipiscor -- to come up with, arrive at, reach, overtake, to attain, get, obtain, acquire, reach, they should take public office, P. pass.
__ren
renunculus -- a little kidney
renunculi -- c. renuli,
__per
repertorium -- an inventory, catalogue, repertory
opertorium -- a cover*
__quis=quaer
requisita -- besoins
requisitum -- 
__stibil=stabil
restibilio -- to reestablish, restore
restibile -- fallow land
__sebac
sebaciaria -- rondes de nuit (torches à la main).
sebaciarium -- die Beleuchtung mit Talglichtern
__clus=claud
seclusorium -- a place for shutting up fowls, a coop
exclusorium -- médicament qui expulse
__secund
secundina -- Placit. arrière-faix, secondines.
secundinae -- the after-birth
__quest=quaes
sequestra -- a means of negotiating, price
sequestro -- to give up for safekeeping, to surrender.
__eques=equus
equestria -- the seats of the knights in the theatre
__serm
sermocino -- to hold a literary conversation, to dispute, discuss
sermocinor -- to talk, parley, converse, discourse
__aemul
to rival, vie with, emulate, strive to excel, To envy, be jealous of % c. aemulor, āri.
subaemulor -- to accumulate secretly
obaemulor -- to stir up, irritate, provoke
__dub
to waver in opinion, be uncertain, be in doubt, be perplexed, doubt, question, had full confidence, inclines to think, perhaps, has no doubt, waver, To deliberate, consider, ponder, meditate, To waver, be irresolute, hesitate, delay, without hesitation
subdubito -- to be somewhat in doubt, hesitate a little
addubito -- to entertain a doubt, incline to doubt, hesitate, be uncertain:
indubito -- to throw doubt upon, express distrust of
__grund#
gargouille, gouttière. % to grunt.
subgrundium -- avant-toit, auvent, entablement, larmier.
suggrunda -- the lower border of a roof, the eaves
__uit=uid
to invite, treat, feast, entertain, for entertainment, To invite, summon, challenge, To ask, request, urge, to incite, allure, attract, encourage flattery, court, allure to transgression, arouse
sub.in.uito -- to suggest to, invite by a hint
re.in.uito -- to invite again, in return
__ira
to be angry, be in a rage, gather his rage into his horns, on our account % to be angry, to be in a rage, absol.;, in, acc. of pronouns
subirascor -- to be out of temper, be somewhat provoked, be touched
obirascor -- to be angry at
__lamin
a thin slice, plate, leaf, layer, lamina
sublamina -- an under-plate
dilamino -- to split in two#
__reg=rex
a ruler of a small country, petty king, prince, chieftain, lord, A king's son, prince, member of a royal family % to direct, regulate % tr., former selon la règle
subregulus -- a petty prince, a feudatory vassal
surregulus -- a petty prince, a feudatory vassal
__man
to stay behind, be left, remain % to flow back
sub.re.maneo -- to remain behind
sur.re.maneo -- to remain behind, med.
__remig
an oar-plying, rowing, Rowing apparatus, the oars, oars that can be shifted, Oarsmen, rowers % to ply the oar, row, to rowers
subremigo -- to row gently
surremigo -- to row underneath, to row along
adremigo -- to row to, toward
eremigo -- to row, sail through, over, to navigate
__scalp
to scratch, to cut, carve, engrave, carve
subscalpo -- to scratch, rub underneath
exscalpo -- to cut out, shape., to frame, prepare
inscalpo -- to cut, carve in, upon, to engrave.
ascalpo -- to scratch; to scratch at;
__mou
subtermoueo -- to push under
intermoueo -- to move, pass between
__fus=fund
a sink, drain
suffusorium -- a vessel for pouring, a pitcher
effusorium -- Hier. instrument pour verser, tyau pour soutires.
infusorium -- a can, reservoir for a lamp
__sulfur
sulfuratum -- brin soufré, allumette / mine de soufre
sulfurata -- Brimstone-matches
__lat
a bearing, carry ing
sullaturio -- to imitate Sulla, play the part of Sulla#
colatura -- filtration;, that which has been strained#
delatura -- an accusation, information#
dilatura -- a postponement, delay
__cad
to fall, fall down, descend, are furled, from a greater height, To fall, fall down, fall prostrate, fall over, has had a fall, to set, go down, fall, sink, fading, at dawn, To fall off, fall away, fall out, drop off, be shed, to fall, empty itself, to be thrown, fall, turn up, to be thrown, fall, To fall dead, fall, die, be slain, prematurely, we must perish, to be slain, be offered, be sacrificed, fall, to yield, to come, fall under, fall, be subject, be exposed, to become visible, into servile hands, To belong, be in accordance, agree, refer, be suitable, apply, fit, suit, become, to fall upon, To fall due, To befall, fall to the lot of, happen, come to pass, occur, result, turn out, fall out, uttered at random, be derived from, how it would turn out, how fulfilled, are fulfilled, turning out to be vain, To lose strength, fall, perish, be overthrown, drop, decline, vanish, decay, cease, to fail, to lose courage, To fail, falter, to lose the cause, expressed terror, fallen into disuse, to fail, be condemned, to abate, subside, die away, to be terminated, end, close, having the same endings % a large vessel for liquids, wine-jar, jug: % - intr. - être sur le point de tomber.
supercado -- to fall upon, over
concado -- - intr. - tomber ensemble.
accado -- - intr. - tomber devant.
3300
decada -- Iren. c. decas.
__lug
to mourn, lament, bewail, deplore, not as dead, To be in mourning, wear mourning apparel % c. luctus
superlugeo -- to mourn over in addition
collugeo -- to lament, grieve together
prolugeo -- to mourn greatly
sublugeo -- to lament a little
elugeo -- to have done mourning
__moli
to make exertion, exert oneself, endeavor, struggle, strive, toil, To labor upon, set in motion, work, ply, wield, weigh anchor, till, try, guide, hurl, To set out, start, depart, To set in motion, bestir, rouse, cause to remove, displace, start, To build, make, erect, construct, prepares, to endeavor to do, undertake, attempt, set about, be busy with, perform, made its way, form, undertake, contrive, lay snares, occasion, striving to usurp, are to be excited, disturb, to struggle % tr., bâtir, construire % a millstone, grindstone, a mill, of lava, Grits, spelt coarsely ground and mixed with salt
supermolior -- - dép. tr. - Itin.-Alex. venir à bout de.
praemolior -- to prepare beforehand*
commolior -- to set in motion, wield:
admolior -- to bring hither:
demolior -- to throw down, tear down, raze, demolish
demolio -- c. demolior.
obmolior -- to push before, throw up before (as a defence or obstruction)
remolior -- to press back, push away
__mol
immolo -- to sprinkle with sacrificial meal; hence, to make a sacrifice, offer, sacrifice, immolate
commolo -- to grind thoroughly, to pound
permolo -- to grind thoroughly
__rid
to laugh at (with dat.), laugh; to ridicule; % - dép. intr. - Petr. c. rideo.
superrideo -- - intr. - Aug. rire de.
anterides -- arcs-boutants
subrideo -- to smile;
corrideo -- to laugh together, aloud
surrideo -- to smile
derideo -- to laugh at, laugh to scorn, scoff at, deride, mock
adrideo -- to laugh, smile at
irrideo -- to ridicule, mock, make fun of; to laugh at;
irrido -- c. irrideo.
aridum -- dry land; dry place; dry surface; dryness;
arida -- Vulg. terre ferme.*
__sapi
to taste of, smack of, savor of, have a flavor of, has no flavor, To have a sense of taste, perceive flavors, to have taste, have discernment, be sensible, be discreet, be wise, discern, if you are wise, know, attend to nothing trivial, are wise too late % must, new wine boiled thick
supersapio -- to possess very good taste
__sap
prosapia -- a stock, race, family
prosapies -- a stock, race, family, gen. sing.
__sum
to take, take up, take in hand, lay hold of, assume, have provided ourselves with, hired, borrow.&mdash;To take, eat, drink, consume, enjoy, put on, put on, To take in exchange, buy, purchase, to take, take up, assume, assumed, take courage, To take up, under take, enter upon, begin, to be undertaken, To exact, inflict, supplicium or poenam, to take such cruel revenge, To take, choose, select, this is my choice, to have adopted, To take, assume, claim, arrogate, appropriate, To take, obtain, get, acquire, receive, To take, lay out, use, apply, employ, spend, consume, worn out, to take for granted, assume, maintain, suppose, affirm, To take, bring forward, cite, mention, adduce
supersumo -- - tr. - Pl.-Val. prendre en outre.
transsumo -- to take, to adopt, assume
praesumo -- to take before, take first
consumo -- to use up, eat, devour
prosumia -- a small kind of vessel for reconnoitring, a spy - boat*
insumo -- to take for, apply, expend
adsumo -- to take to oneself, receive:
desumo -- to take, choose, select
resumo -- to take up again, take back, resume
__und
a wave, billow, collect., Water, moisture, real husbands, an agitated mass, surge, billow, stream, tide % to rise in waves, throw up waves, surge, swell, To wave, undulate, flowing
superundo -- to overflow;
redundo -- to run over, pour over, stream over, overflow
abundo -- to overflow, stream over, of a river or lake:
exundo -- to flow out, overflow
inundo -- Act., to overflow, inundate
obundo -- - intr. - déborder.
adundo -- c. abundo,
__mund
emundo -- to clean out, make quite clean
__gra
to make heavy, load, burden, weigh down, weight, oppress, loaded with fruit, to burden, oppress, incommode, To make more grievous, aggravate, increase % to be burdened, feel incommoded, be vexed, take amiss, bear with reluctance, regard as a burden, hesitate, do unwillingly, to be loath, shrink from bringing, throwing off
supragrauo -- - tr. - Tert. surcharger.
praegrauo -- to press heavily upon, oppress with weight, encumber
degrauo -- to weigh down, overpower, burden
ingrauo -- to weigh down, oppress, molest
adgrauo -- to add to the weight of, to make heavier.
__nau
tranauigo -- - tr. - traverser en bateau.
enauigo -- to sail away
__enn=ann
transenna -- a netting, lattice-work#
perenno -- to last, endure, be permanent
__fum
to smoke, steam, reek, fume, reeked, the evening meal is preparing % smoke, steam, fume, columns of smoke, old flavor, had consumed % to smoke, emit smoke
transfumo -- to smoke through, to breathe out like smoke
suffumo -- to smoke, reek a little;
effumo -- to emit smoke, to smoke
infumo -- to smoke, dry in the smoke
__mut
to borrow, obtain as a loan, am obliged to borrow, to borrow, take for use, derive, obtain, get, procure % to move, move away, remove, quit her dress or her dwelling, be forced to leave, if I can only get away, transplanted, to alter, change, transform, vary, modify, with trifling modifications, one's will, incapable of change, shifted, transformed in appearance, turned, by fermentation has turned, into marble, To suffer change, alter, change, to vary, change, diversify, used figuratively.&mdash;To change in color, color, dye, To change, make better, improve, Mi, To change for the worse, spoil, turn, to change, replace, make a change in, put on mourning, assuming a squalid garb, to change, shift, alter, to be removed, go into exile, to interchange, exchange, To exchange, barter, sell, are sold dear, To forsake % to grow dumb % r % a loan, a lending % a dumb creature, brute % to borrow
transmuto -- to change, shift, transmute
permuto -- to change throughout, alter completely
commuto -- to alter wholly, change entirely:
submuto -- to interchange substitute
obmutesco -- to become dumb, lose one's speech, be silent, to become silent, cease
immuto -- to change, alter, transform;
immutesco -- to become dumb, speechless
demuto -- Act., to change, alter, to alter for the worse, to make worse.
__mutu
promutuor -- to be loaned beforehand
promutuum -- an advance, loan
__nub
to veil oneself, be married, marry, wed
transnubo -- int., contracter un second mariage
praenubo -- - tr. - 1 - voiler par-devant. - intr. - 2 - se marier d'avance.
connubium -- marriage/wedlock; right to marry; act/ceremony of marriage (usu. pl.);
pronuba -- she who prepares the bride, bride's-woman, discord shall preside over the marriage
pronubo -- eine Ehe stiften
subnuba -- a rival
denubo -- to marry away, go away in marriage
innuba -- qui n'est pas mariée.
innubo -- to marry into
obnubo -- to veil, cover*
renubo -- to marry again
__pic
a pie, magpie % a pitch-pine, forest pine % to bedaub with pitch, to pitch, to tar. % a woodpecker
impico -- to cover with pitch
oppico -- to smear over, seal up with pitch
apica -- a sheep that has no wool on the belly#
apicio -- bind;;#
apicium -- #
__spic
transpicio -- to look, see through
dispicio -- to descry, discern, perceive, make out, distinguish, detect, to perceive, discern, discover, detect, To consider, reflect upon, look about, regard
__tin=tene
transtineo -- to go through, pass through
abstineo -- to keep back, keep off, hold back, suppress, by not keeping your hands off, restrain, refrained from exercising against them the rights of war, se, to keep oneself from, refrain, abstain, to refrain, abstain, hold his peace
contineo -- to hold together, bound, limit, comprise, enclose, surround, environ, made a connection with, were comprised within, are shut in, hang together, To keep together, keep in a body, To shut in, hem in, surround, hold, To hold fast, keep, hold in place, retain, To keep, detain, shut in, hold, restrain, repress, keep hands off, to stay, keeps in doors, to halt, To comprise, contain, comprehend, to hold together, keep, retain, To hold back, detain, repress, check, curb, stay, stop, subdue, refrain, keep to myself, keep back, are confined within the limits of.&mdash;To comprehend, embrace, include, comprise, consists, the principal points
distineo -- to keep asunder, separate, part, hold back, To keep back, hinder, detain, occupy, engage, employ, divert, kept from uniting, To hinder, delay, put off, prevent, to distract, perplex
detineo -- to hold off, keep back, detain, check, if you have time, to hinder, prevent, delay, to prolong his life, to lengthen, fill, To keep, occupy, engage, busy
obtineo -- to hold fast, have, occupy, possess, preserve, keep, maintain, be governor in, during my administration.&mdash;To maintain, keep, preserve, uphold, your old self, maintain, prevailed during, is generally accepted, to become proverbial, be numbered among, would not yield, To assert, maintain, show, prove, demonstrate, To get possession of, gain, acquire, obtain, gained, gained the victory, To bring about, bring to pass, obtain
retineo -- to hold back, keep back, keep, detain, retain, restrain, must be kept, detained, as security, To hold fast, keep possession of, retain, keep, to hold in check, keep within bounds, restrain, check, repress, control, To hold fast, keep, retain, To keep, preserve, maintain, uphold, was insisted on. &mdash;To occupy, engross, fix the attention of
attineo -- e, confirm
3400
attinae -- stones built up like a wall for a boundary mark#
cotinus -- a shrub that furnishes a purple color#
atinia -- espèce d'orme.#
__tin2
continor -- encounter, meet with
continuo -- to join, make continuous, connect, unite, border upon, to erect in rows, to buy contiguous tracts, combine, finish, To make continuous, carry on uninterruptedly, extend, prolong, draw out, continue, serve dish after dish, follow close upon, to pass, occupy
continuor -- to unite one's self to, to join
__uor
to swallow whole, swallow up, eat greedily, devour, To swallow up, overwhelm, destroy, to devour, pursue passionately, study eagerly, hasten, To practice unnatural lust
transuoro -- to gulp down, swallow down, devour
conuoro -- to eat up, devour
deuoro -- to swallow, gulp down, devour, consume
__bell
to wage war, carry on war, war, conducted, Supin. acc., P, warriors, To fight, contend, triumphing over % ⌟?ࠂ㋈ඒ % war, against the Germans, against kings, against the H, against, to undertake, carry on, to protract, not aggressive but defensive, to discontinue, to end by treaty, to end successfully, to terminate, make impossible, to read about, to ratify a declaration of war, to give the command in, broke out, be waged by detachments, loc, in war, during war, domi, in war-time, during war, righteous, regular warfare, the result, indecisive, the chances of war, military skill, the law of war, the character of the war, war, A feud, private hostility, an army, Battle, A history of a war % to war, fight (rare for bello):
antebello -- faire la guerre avant
debello -- to fight out, fight completely, finish a war
rebello -- to wage war again, revolt, rebel
rebellium -- a revolt
rebelles -- rebels
imbellia -- unfitness for war
adbello -- to make war upon
__cepti
conceptiuum -- conception, intelligence
deceptiua -- verbes qui expriment une idée de tromperie.
__eleuther
eleutherium -- sorte de collier, signe de liberté
eleutheria -- liberty
__fant=fam
infantaria -- a woman fond of infants
infantarii -- sacrificers of infants
__iug
a yoke, collar, A yoke, pair, team, pair of horses, A yoke, subjugate, The constellation Libra, The beam of a weaver's loom, A bench in a ship, A height, summit, ridge, chain of mountains, a pair, A yoke, bonds, burden, fetters, shake off, the yoke of marriage, to be restive % to bind, marry
introiugi -- limoniers??
coniuga -- wife; spouse; consort (L+S);
coniugium -- a connection, union, marriage, wedlock, A husband, A wife
coniugo -- to form:*
coniugius -- Inscr. c. conjugium.
subiugia -- yoke-straps
subiugo -- To bring under the yoke
subiugum -- the name of an unknown animal
disiugo -- to separate
abiugo -- to loose from the yoke;, to remove, to separate from
adiugo -- to yoke, fasten to, together, to unite.
deiugo -- to separate, sever
diiugo -- to separate
diiugium -- séparation
seiugae -- chariot and six
seiugo -- to disjoin, part, separate, divide
aiuga -- ??
__suad
to advise, recommend, exhort, urge, persuade, to be persuaded, to urge, induce, impel, to recommend, advocate, promote, support
malesuadium -- übler Rat, Verführung
dissuadeo -- to advise against, dissuade, oppose by argument, resist, object
persuadeo -- to convince, persuade
consuadeo -- to advise, counsel strongly
desuadeo -- - tr. - Aug. Gloss. dissuader; déconseiller.
__nub
pernubilo -- to darken
adnubilo -- to involve in clouds, to overcast, to obscure
annubilo -- to involve in clouds, to overcast, to obscure
innubilo -- to cloud over, to overcast, make gloomy.
obnubilo -- to cover with clouds, fog; to overcloud, darken, obscure
__caec
to make blind, blind, made obscure % le caecum [intestin]
praecaeco -- to blind beforehand
excaeco -- to blind, make blind
occaeco -- to make blind, blind, deprive of sight, To make dark, darken, obscure, To hide, conceal, to darken, make obscure, render unintelligible, To make blind, blind, delude, confound
__caed
to cut, hew, cut down, fell, cut off, cut to pieces, attack my own interests, To strike upon, knock at, beat, strike, cudgel, beating, is pressed, to strike mortally, kill, murder, shed, to slay, slaughter, cut to pieces, vanquish, destroy, to slaughter, to declare the forfeiture of a security, confiscate a pledge, chop words, chat, cudgel one another
praecaedit -- to cut off in front;, to cut off.
praecaedo -- 
concaedes -- an abattis, barricade of felled trees:
percaedo -- to cut up completely
__clar
to grow bright, to become audible, sound clear, To become illustrious, grow famous % to be bright, shine, to be renowned, be illustrious % to make bright, exhibit, to illustrate, make famous
praeclareo -- to shine forth
perclaresco -- to become very clear, very well known
declaro -- to disclose, make evident, reveal
acclaro -- to make clear, reveal, disclose
exclaro -- to light up, illumine
inclaresco -- to grow splendid, become famous
occlaresco -- - intr. - devenir célèbre.
__orig
c. auriga.
praeoriga -- per ou prae, auriga), intendant d'un haras [ou] palefrenier
peroriga -- per ou prae, auriga), intendant d'un haras [ou] palefrenier
__palp
to wheedle, coax % to stroke, touch softly, pat, caress, to wheedle, flatter % (Lebaigue P. 884 et P. 885) caresse, flatterie. % the soft palm of the hand
praepalpo -- vorn streicheln
compalpo -- to stroke, caress
suppalpor -- to caress, fondle, wheedle a little
expalpo -- - tr. - caresser pour obtenir, soutirer par des caresses.
expalpor -- to obtain by coaxing, flattery
__sulc
a furrow, A trench, ditch, A track, furrow, wake, trail % to furrow, turn up, plough, To furrow, plough, cross, traverse, mark
praesulco -- tr., tracer d'avance
dissulco -- - tr. - séparer par un sillon, fendre.
persulco -- to furrow through, to plough up.
desulco -- to furrow through, to plough up
insulco -- to furrow, make furrows
resulco -- to furrow, plough again, to scratch open
__umbr
a shade, shadow % to shadow, become shadowy, darken % to shade, shadow, overshadow, overspread, cover; to make, cast a shade
praeumbro -- überschatten - verdunkeln
adumbro -- to sketch in shadow, outline, represent vaguely, To imitate, copy
inumbro -- to overshadow, darken
obumbro -- to overshadow, shade
__uiu
semperuiua -- 
semperuiuum -- 
__frond
to put forth leaves, be in leaf, become green % to become leafy, put forth leaves, shoot
subfrondeo -- to put forth leaves
effrondesco -- to put forth leaves, be covered with foliage
refrondesco -- to be covered with leaves again, to grow green again
defrondo -- tr., élaguer
__urg
- to press/squeeze/bear hard/down; to tread/traverse continually; to push/shove/thrust; - to hem in; to threaten by proximity; to press verbally/argument/point; to follow up; % to press, push, force, drive, impel, urge, roll up, Poet. intrans., press, To press upon, weigh down, bear hard upon, press hard, beset, To weigh down, burden, oppress, clog, To urge, press, stimulate, drive, solicit, is pressing.&mdash;To press upon, crowd, hem in, confine, to press, ply, urge, insist, To follow up, keep to, stick to, ply hard, push forward, urge on, drive, frequent, plunge into, hasten, insisted
superurgeo -- oben (oberhalb) eindringen
perurgeo -- To press upon greatly, to oppress, distress
suburgeo -- to drive, urge close to
suburgueo -- to drive close, drive up
adurgeo -- to pursue closely:
exurgeo -- to squeeze out
inurgeo -- to push, thrust; to obtrude
amurga -- the watery part that flows out in pressing olives, the lees, dregs of oil
__gemat
tragematia -- sweetmeats, confectionery
tragematium -- dim. de tragemata
__cind
abscindo -- to tear off, break away, break off:
discindo -- to tear asunder, cut apart, cleave, divide, rend, tear
excindo -- to demolish/destroy, raze to ground (town/building); to exterminate/destroy (people);
__gnos
c. nosco.
adgnosco -- to recognize, realize, discern; to acknowledge, claim, admit to/responsibility;
cognosco -- to become acquainted with, acquire knowledge of, ascertain, learn, perceive, understand ; perf., to know, after reading, knew by their weapons, tested, experienced by, Supin. acc., Supin. abl., To recognize, acknowledge, identify, seemed to recognize him, identified, is like himself, to identify.&mdash;To seek to know, inquire into, investigate, examine, To criticise, appreciate, To reconnoitre, spy, act as scout
dignosco -- to know apart, to distinguish, discern
agnosco -- to recognize, identify, make out:
3500
ignosco -- to pardon, forgive, excuse, overlook, allow, indulge, make allowance, conniving, make excuses for
__ulter=alter
adulterium -- adultery; blending/mixing of different strains/ingredients; contamination;
adultera -- one who approaches another, from unlawful, criminal love, an adulterer, adulteress
adultero -- to commit adultery, C.
__plod
Act., to clap, strike, beat
complodo -- to clap/strike (hands) together, applaud (enthusiastically/with emotion);
displodo -- to burst, cause to explode
supplodo -- to stamp
applodo -- To strike, upon, to clap
explodo -- to drive out, hiss away, hoot off, To reject, disapprove
__conchyl
the extracted juice of a plant
conchylium -- a shell - fish, C.; a purple shell-fish, Ct. &mdash; Esp., an oyster:
conchylia -- Juv. vêtements teints de pourpre.
__cred
to give as a loan, lend, make a loan, To commit, consign, intrust, on fair ground, not on such terms intrusted to them, to trust, confide in, have confidence in, open fight, To believe, give credence, trust, one who knows by experience, upon my word, To believe, hold true, admit, would I could discredit, believers, To be of opinion, think, believe, suppose, imagine, one might have imagined, would fain believe, expecting, be taken for, I suppose, I can't suppose he meant to teach
concredo -- to intrust, consign, commit:
concreduo -- to intrust, consign, commit to
discredo -- to be incredulous towards, not to believe
accredo -- to accord belief, believe fully:
__crem
to burn, consume by fire, to be ablaze in her head - dress, as an offering % dry fire-wood, brushwood % copeaux, bois sec, petit bois. % c. cremor.
concremo -- to burn up, consume:
decremo -- to burn up, consume by fire
excremo -- to burn
recremo -- to burn again, burn utterly
__cumb
skiff, small boat; (esp. that in which Charon ferried the dead) % 
concumbo -- to lie together, lie with, cohabit
discumbo -- to lie down, recline at table, took our places, invited to dinner, To lie down to sleep
procumbo -- to fall forwards, sink down, fall prostrate, bend to their oars, To lean forward, bend down, sink, be beaten down, be broken down, fall, were beaten down, fell in upon, to fall, be ruined, To extend, spread, lie
succumbo -- to fall down, lie down, sink, had sunk in sleep, to yield, be overcome, submit, surrender, succumb, to yield, To cohabit with
percumbo -- 
subcumbus -- a boundary-stone
decumbo -- to lie down, recline, take place, to fall, succumb, yield
incumba -- the impost, chaptrel
incumbo -- to lay oneself, lean, press, support oneself, fall on, bend to, perched on, fall on, To lean, incline, overhang, to press upon, throw oneself, to press upon, settle on, burden, oppress, weigh upon, To make an effort, apply oneself, exert oneself, take pains with, pay attention to, attend to this, influence, accelerate, To incline, choose, be inclined to, lean towards, whithersoever he may try, are inclined
recumbo -- to lie down again, lie down, recline, sink down, to recline at table, to fall, sink down, settle down, sinks back
accumbo -- to lay oneself down, lie beside, to recline at table
occumbo -- to fall in death, die, by thy hand
__flig
to strike, strike down
confligo -- to come into collision, dash together:
confligium -- a striking, dashing together, Absol.
profligo -- to strike to the ground, cast down utterly, overthrow, overcome, conquer, to overthrow, ruin, destroy, crush, To bring to an end, finish, despatch, do away
effligo -- to strike dead, kill, destroy
infligo -- to dash upon, strike against, is hurled at.&mdash;To inflict
adfligo -- to dash at, strike upon, throw down, overthrow:
__greg
to collect into a flock, herd, to gather into a host, to collect, assemble, all together
congrego -- to collect in a flock, swarm, To collect, assemble, unite, join, associate, to assemble, birds of a feather
disgrego -- to separate, divide
segrego -- to separate from the flock, To set apart, lay aside, put away, separate, sever, part, remove, segregate, hold aloof from, divided, to separate, remove, divide, fight them separately
adgrego -- to collect, include, group, implicate; to (cause to) flock/join together, attach;
abgrego -- - tr. - séparer du troupeau.
__quir=quaer
conquiro -- to seek for, hunt up, search out, procure, bring together, collect, to seek after, search for, go in quest of, to seek to commit
perquiro -- to ask diligently after, make eager search for, investigate
disquiro -- to inquire diligently, investigate
exquiro -- to search out, seek diligently, inquire into, scrutinize, inquire, ask, to be too exacting in, ransack, seek, implore, ascertained, devise
inquiro -- to seek after, search for, To search into, examine, investigate, scrutinize, after investigating it, how long the father will live, to make an investigation, seek grounds of accusation
requiro -- to seek again, look after, search for, To seek to know, ask, inquire for, demand, To need, want, lack, be in want of, require, are called for.&mdash;To perceive to be wanting, feel the lack of, look in vain for, miss, lament the absence of, lament
anquiro -- to seek on all sides, look about, search after, to inquire diligently, examine into, to conduct a judicial inquiry, To prosecute, for a fine
equiria -- annual races in the Campus Martius, in honor of Mars#
__secr
consecro -- to dedicate, devote, offer as sacred, consecrate, To honor as a deity, place among gods, deify, glorify, consign, immortalize, To doom to destruction, devote, make accursed, execrate, To surrender, to the vengeance of, to devote, attach devotedly, ascribe as sacred, To make immortal, immortalize
consecror -- c. consecro
prosecro -- to sacrifice
exsecror -- to curse, utter curses, execrate, abhor, To take an oath with imprecations, having sworn to
exsecro -- accursed, execrable, detestable
obsecro -- to beseech, entreat, implore, supplicate, conjure, conjures you, st pers, Ph, Do, I cry you mercy, I pray, but I beseech you
desecro -- - tr. - consacrer, dédier.
resecro -- To pray, beseech again, to implore repeatedly
__sequ
consequia -- consequence; retinue; rear guard;
prosequium -- attendance*
subsequium -- the sequel, what follows after
obsequium -- compliance, yieldingness, complaisance, indulgence, gluttony, to her lover, by its pliancy, Obedience, allegiance*
obsequiae -- funeral rites, obsequies*
__exsequ
exsequia -- funeral procession/rites (pl.), obsequies; [~as ire => attend funeral];
exsequiae -- a funeral procession, funeral obsequies, to attend a funeral
exsequior -- to perform the funeral rites, to bury
exsequium -- repas de funérailles.
__sort
to cast lots, draw lots, drew lots for their official duties, to assign provinces by agreement or by lot, To draw lots for, assign by lot, allot, obtain by lot, appoint by lot, decides the fate of, cast lots to decide, To share, divide, distribute, To choose, select, To get by chance, get as a lot, get, obtain, receive % to draw lots
consortium -- fellowship, partio ipation, society
dissortium -- Gloss. désunion.*
subsortior -- to choose a substitute by lot, substitute by lot*
__summ
the top, summit, the chief place, highest rank, leadership, supremacy, the supreme power, the command in chief, The main thing, chief point, principal matter, sum, essence, substance, the main points, the main issue of the war, for the general welfare, to a general engagement, extreme right, the flower of leaders, An amount, sum, aggregate, whole, quantity, the main body of the army, the amount, sum, total, aggregate, a sum, amount, ellips, pecuniae, on the whole, generally, in short, in a word, to sum up, in all, in fine % - tr. - récapituler, résumer % the top, surface; the highest place, the head of the table, the extremities
consummo -- to accomplish, complete, finish, perfect, an intercalary day, the glory of finishing
subsummo -- to sum up, to multiply*
assummo -- dazuzählen, addieren*
__cion#
contionor -- to meet, convene, form an assembly, To make a speech, deliver an oration, harangue, address, declaim, declaimed, declared before the people
cocionor -- to be a broker
__liber
free persons, the children of a family, children % to set free, free, liberate, manumit, To free, release, extricate, deliver, acquit, exempted from taxes, from his duty to Venus, to pay a debt, would be set free, discharge a promise, cancel, settle, cleared of buildings obstructing the view.&mdash;To absolve, acquit, of having started with the design
delibero -- to weigh well, consider maturely, deliberate, ponder, meditate, take counsel, consult, advise upon, take counsel of, there can be no hesitation, To consult, To resolve, determine
deliberium -- avis*
elibero -- c. libero.
__uener
to adore, revere, do homage to, honor, venerate; to worship; to beg, pray, entreat; % to reverence, worship, adore, revere, venerate, To revere, do homage to, reverence, honor, To ask reverently, beseech, implore, beg, entreat, supplicate, honored with the prayer that she would spring up
deueneror -- to reverence, worship
adueneror -- to give honor to, to adore, worship
__find
to cleave, split, part, separate, divide, to divide
diffindo -- to cleave asunder, split, divide, to open, to detract, can deny no part of it, To render useless, compelled adjournment
confindo -- to cleave, split:
defindo -- - tr. - Enn. fendre.
effindo -- to divide, cleave
infindo -- to cut into, cleave
__lacer
to tear to pieces, mangle, rend, mutilate, lacerate, To break up, wreck, shatter, To waste, plunder, to wound, hurt, distress, torture, pain, afflict, To ruin, destroy, dissipate, squander, waste, To censure, tear to pieces, slander, asperse, abuse, rail at
dilacero -- to tear to pieces, tear apart
delacero -- to tear in pieces, to frustrate, destroy
__pens
dispenso -- to disburse, pay out
dispensor -- c. dispenso
compenso -- to balance, make good, compensate, counterbalance:
perpenso -- to weigh carefully;, to ponder, consider
perpensum -- alidade bien dirigée
impensa -- disbursement, expenditure, outlay, cost, charge, expense, without cost, economize, at the expense of my reputation, make contribution, Outlay, cost, waste
impenso -- - tr. - Gloss. employer, dépenser.
expensa -- a disbursement, expense
expenso -- To pay out, pay
expensum -- money paid, a payment, receipts and disbursements
repenso -- to weigh against
__perg
to go on, proceed, press on, hasten, continue, go forward, march, make haste, marched, prosecute your enterprise, speak out, go on to speak, to march on
dispergo -- to scatter, spread abroad, disperse, P. perf., scattered, straggling, To besprinkle, bespatter, to scatter, conduct without order, disperse, without organization, To spread abroad
expergisco -- c. expergiscor.
3600
expergo -- to awaken, rouse up
__pert=pari
impertio -- to share with, give a part, communicate, bestow, impart, salutes thee heartily, wouldst show, To bestow, direct, assign, give, devote, To take as a partner, cause to share, present with
impertior -- to take as a partner, make a sharer in
reperta -- découvertes, inventions*
aperto -- to lay bare*
apertum -- that which is open, free; an open, clear space
__pert=pars
dispertio -- to distribute, divide, assign, to divide, apportion, distracted
dispertior -- to distribute, apportion, refine
__trib
distribuo -- to divide, distribute, apportion, spread
contribuo -- to unite, incorporate, associate, enroll together
pertribuo -- to give
retribuo -- to give back, return, restore, repay
adtribuo -- to assign/allot/attribute/impute to; to grant, pay; to appoint, put under jurisdiction;
detribuo -- c. attribuo.
intribuo -- to contribute, to pay tribute, taxes
__element
elementum -- a first principle, simple substance, element
elementa -- - 1 - lettres de l'alphabet. - 2 - éléments (physiques); les quatre éléments. - 3 - rudiments, principes, notions premières. - 4 - commencement, principe, origine.
__acerb
to aggravate, make worse % - 1 - amertume (de la mer). - 2 - contrariété. - 3 - le malheur.
exacerbo -- to exasperate, irritate, provoke
exacerbesco -- to become exasperated, irritated, angry
obacerbo -- - tr. - Fest. exaspérer.
__probr
exprobro -- to reproach with, blame for, find fault, charge, upbraid, reproach, throw the blame of
opprobrium -- a reproach, scandal, disgrace, dishonor, opprobrium, A reproach, taunt, abuse, abusive word, a reproach, disgrace
opprobro -- to reproach, taunt, upbraid, in lemm.
__ign
igniculus -- a little flame, spark, fire, vehemence, sparks
__agn
agnicula -- petite agnelle.
agniculus -- a lambkin
__augur
the observance of omens, interpretation of omens, divination, augury, An omen, sign, event interpreted by augury, A prediction, forecast, foreboding, the fulfilment % to act as augur, augur, predict, foretell, To surmise, imagine, conjecture, suppose % to act as augur, take the auguries of, consult by augury, absol. impers., after augury, under the sanction of auguries, To imagine, conjecture, forebode, To consecrate by auguries
inauguro -- to take omens from the flight of birds, practise augury, divine
exauguro -- to desecrate, make profane
__quiet
mettre au repos. % to calm, to quiet % calm, quiet % the still, tranquil, motionless air
inquieto -- to disturb, trouble, molest, harass; to press legal claim against; to fidget, twiddle;
inquietor -- Prisc. c. inquieto.
__staur
instauro -- to establish, ordain
restauro -- to restore, repair, rebuild;
__im=em (take)
-I. the bottom, depth, lowest part. -II. the last, the end % 
interimo -- to take from the midst, take away, do away with, abolish, To destroy, slay, kill, To distress intolerably, afflict
perimo -- to take away entirely, annihilate, extinguish, destroy, cut off, hinder, prevent, disappeared, destroyed, To kill, slay
redimio -- to bind round, wreathe round, encircle, gird, wind, deck, crown
redimo -- to buy back, repurchase, redeem, To ransom, release, redeem, ransomed at the public cost, To buy off, set free, release, rescue, To buy up, obtain by purchase, take by contract, undertake, hire, farm, secure by bribery, undertake, to buy, purchase, redeem, secure, gain, acquire, obtain, procure, To buy off, ward off, obviate, avert, To pay for, make amends for, atone for, compensate for
redimiae -- rançon.
adimo -- to take away, take from, deprive of, to free men from sorrow, to deprive of civil rights, grant to Caecilius, yet deny to Vergil, rob, will forbid to write verses, to snatch away, carry off, from death, dead
eximo -- to take out, take away, remove, To free, release, deliver, let you off, to take away, remove, banish, To except, make an exception of, To free, release, deliver, exempt, to consume, waste, lose
__anim
anima -- air, a current of air, breeze, breath, wind, the air, Breath, take breath, correct their breath, the fumes of wine, life, to give up the ghost, exert yourself in gesturing to the point of death, is in debt for his life?, for everything, A life, living being, soul, person, The shades, departed spirits, manes, The rational soul, mind
animo -- to enliven, quicken, animate / to dispose, inspirit, are inspirited
animus -- the rational soul, soul, life, the mental powers, intelligence, reason, intellect, mind, attention, whose discernment, the whole intelligence of the community, Of the memory, Consciousness, recollection, self-possession, the conscience, Opinion, judgment, notion, belief, in my judgment, to the best of your knowledge and belief. &mdash; The imagination, fancy, Feeling, sensibility, affection, inclination, passion, heart, the character, bad mind, bad heart, Disposition, inclination, well disposed, both gold and the disposition, to give it, a kindly disposition, from the heart, in earnest, deeply, sincerely, from impulse or with some design, adjj., pitying him in her heart, disposition, character, temper, wild nature, Courage, spirit, to be of good courage, courage enough, hope, the violence, give it quicker motion, Haughtiness, arrogance, pride, your pride is roused, bear the arrogance and pride, Passion, vehemence, wrath, an even mind, calmness, moderation, equanimity, with even mind, contentedly, resignedly, patiently, is content to believe, Inclination, pleasure, for the sake of amusement, for diversion, for pleasure, employ musicians.&mdash;Will, desire, purpose, design, intention, resolve, purpose, to intend, my plan is, it was my purpose
animesco -- int., s'animer, s'irriter
__opulent
opulentia -- riches, wealth, opulence, abundance, affluence
opulento -- to make rich, enrich
__cont
to look on, gaze upon, behold, survey % a pole, pike % - tr. - interroger. % to delay action, to linger, loiter, hesitate, doubt, absol., inf., subj.-clause % To look on, gaze upon, behold, survey, to consider attentively
percontor -- to ask particularly, question strictly, inquire, interrogate, investigate, of her too he wished to ask some questions
perconto -- to question strictly, particularly, to inquire earnestly
decontor -- to hesitate, to be at a loss*
__haur
to draw up, draw out, draw, draw from the dregs, take the worst.&mdash;To drain, drink up, spill, shed, draws in, To tear up, pluck out, draw out, take, swallow, devour, consume, exhaust, pluck out, scraped up, gathered, draw, engulfs, fetching a deep sigh, to drink in, take eagerly, seize upon, imbibe, exhaust, feast on, enjoy the light, imbibes, had traversed, exhausts, To draw, borrow, take, drink in, derive, be taken to heart, revel in
perhaurio -- to drain completely, to drink up
exhaurio -- to draw out, empty, exhaust
dehaurio -- To skim off
adhaurio -- - tr. - engloutir.
__noct
a night-owl, owl % to draw towards night, to grow dark % c. nox.
pernocto -- to stay all night, pass the night
abnocto -- to pass the night abroad, to stay out all night
__petr
zu Stein werden, versteinern % a rock, crag
perpetro -- to carry through, complete, effect, achieve, execute, perform, accomplish, commit, perpetrate, P. pass.
propetro -- tr., donner à achever
impetro -- to gain one's end, achieve, bring to pass, effect, get, obtain, procure, succeed, to persuade himself, absol.
impetrio -- to seek through omens, inquire for by auspices*
__uast
to make empty, deprive of occupants, desert, vacate, void, empty, lay waste, desolate, ravage, devastate, destroy, to lie waste, perplexed % to become desert, waste
peruasto -- to lay waste, devastate
deuasto -- to lay waste, devastate
diuasto -- - tr. - Arn. dévaster, anéantir.
euasto -- to lay utterly waste, devastate
__uulg
common people/general public/multitude/common herd/rabble/crowd/mob; flock; % to spread around/among the multitude; to publish, divulge, circulate; to prostitute
peruulgo -- to make publicly known, spread abroad;
prouulgo -- to make publicly known, to publish, divulge
inuulgo -- to bring before the public, to publish, make known, Absol.
__con
to undertake, endeavor, attempt, try, venture, seek, aim, make an effort, begin, make trial of: % a cone % c. corusco.
praeconium -- the office of a public crier, A crying out in public, proclaiming, publishing, A celebrating, laudation, commendation*
praeconor -- to perform the office of public crier, herald, to herald, proclaim; to praise*
perconor -- to carry out
__acon
acona -- pierre à aiguiser.
aconae -- pointed stones
__dur
Y % to be hard % to grow hard, harden % le bois dur de la vigne / âpre [au goût, à l'oreille] / grossier, sans art / dur à la fatigue, à la peine, etc. / dur, sévère, cruel, endurci, insensible / impudent / dur, difficile, pénible, rigoureux [en parl. des choses]
praeduro -- to harden; to make very hard;
conduro -- to harden, to make very hard
perduro -- to last, endure
obduro -- to be hard, hold out, persist, endure
obduresco -- to grow hard
induresco -- to grow hard on, stiffen upon
induro -- to make hard, harden
eduresco -- to grow hard
eduro -- to last, continue
__hib
praehibeo -- to hold forth, offer, furnish, grant, give, supply
perhibeo -- to bring forward, adduce, To say, assert, To call, name, to be cited
prohibeo -- to hold before, hold back, keep away, check, restrain, hinder, prevent, avert, keep off, debar, refrain, impede, but may the gods forbid it, To forbid, prohibit, To keep away, keep, preserve, defend, protect
redhibeo -- to give back, cancel the sale of
adhibeo -- to hold toward, turn to, apply, add to, eat with, clasps, to furnish, produce, bring forward, apply, bestow, administer, call to one's aid, give close attention, to bring to, summon, employ, we are summoned, shall be brought upon the stage, to summon for counsel, consult, to invite to dinner, invite to a banquet, entertain, To treat, handle, act towards, to put to use, apply, use, employ for, use in, calling to their aid, to set bounds, to retain in memory, to employ compulsion, compel, storm the defences of wisdom
cohibeo -- to hold together, hold, contain, confine, embrace, comprise, to encircle, To hold, keep, keep back, hinder, stay, restrain, stop, to kill, to stop, to hold in check, restrain, limit, confine, control, keep back, repress, tame, subdue, control yourself
exhibeo -- to hold forth, tender, present, deliver, give up, produce, furnish, To show, display, exhibit, use the language of her father, proves, render, what show shall I make?, revealed, To exhibit, employ, occasion, cause
inhibeo -- to hold in, hold back, keep back, restrain, curb, check, To row backwards, To stop rowing, To restrain, hinder, prevent, To exercise, practise, perform, use, apply, inflict
abhibeo -- - tr. - éloigner.
dehibeo -- infra, to have, keep from some one, habet, debet, retinet, to owe
__par
to make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order, contrive, design, make preparations, make ready, for whom the Fates are making ready, assume, prepare for flight, introduce, ready to speak, reflex. pron., to prepare oneself, get ready, To prepare, intend, resolve, purpose, determine, meditate, be on the point of, be about, so ordered.&mdash;To procure, acquire, get, obtain, To procure with money, buy, purchase
praeparo -- to make ready beforehand, prepare, equip, make preparations
anteparo -- - tr. - préparer.
/compareo -- to be evident, appear, be plain, be visible:
comparo -- to bring together as equals, connect, pair, match, unite, join, to set in opposition, To bring together, match, oppose, to count equal, regard as equal, rank with, To compare, I will institute no comparison, by considering, shows in comparison, to agree together, come to an agreement
disparasco -- to be unlike, med.*
dispareo -- int., disparaître
disparo -- to part, separate, divide
supparo -- -I. to make somewhat like, similar -II. to fit, adjust
supparum -- - 1 - petite voile (à une seule écoute), voile de perroquet. - 2 - châle (de femme). - 3 - un vêtement d'homme (en toile). - 4 - Tert. petite bannière, labarum, flamme.
supparus -- A linen garment worn by women*
reparo -- to get again, acquire anew, recover, retrieve, restore, repair, renew
3700
separo -- to disjoin, sever, part, sunder, divide, separate, Fig., to set aside, treat apart, consider separately, distinguish, except
separius -- préposé aux clôtures
/appareo -- it is apparent/evident/clear/certain/visible/noticeable/found; it appears;
apparo -- to prepare, make ready, put in order, provide:
/apparesco -- to begin to appear
appario -- to gain besides, acquire
__pare
/praeparo -- to make ready beforehand, prepare, equip, make preparations
/anteparo -- - tr. - préparer.
compareo -- to be evident, appear, be plain, be visible:
/comparo -- to bring together as equals, connect, pair, match, unite, join, to set in opposition, To bring together, match, oppose, to count equal, regard as equal, rank with, To compare, I will institute no comparison, by considering, shows in comparison, to agree together, come to an agreement
/disparasco -- to be unlike, med.
dispareo -- int., disparaître
/disparo -- to part, separate, divide
/supparo -- -I. to make somewhat like, similar -II. to fit, adjust
/supparum -- - 1 - petite voile (à une seule écoute), voile de perroquet. - 2 - châle (de femme). - 3 - un vêtement d'homme (en toile). - 4 - Tert. petite bannière, labarum, flamme.
/supparus -- A linen garment worn by women
/reparo -- to get again, acquire anew, recover, retrieve, restore, repair, renew
3700
/separo -- to disjoin, sever, part, sunder, divide, separate, Fig., to set aside, treat apart, consider separately, distinguish, except
/separius -- préposé aux clôtures
appareo -- it is apparent/evident/clear/certain/visible/noticeable/found; it appears;
/apparo -- to prepare, make ready, put in order, provide:
apparesco -- to begin to appear
/appario -- to gain besides, acquire
__rip
a bank, margin, at various parts of the bank, The shore of the sea
praeripio -- to snatch away, carry off, To seize prematurely, presume upon.&mdash;To forestall, anticipate, baffle in advance
proripio -- to drag forth, i. e. spring forth
subripio -- to snatch away, take secretly, withdraw privily, steal, pilfer, purloin, plagiarized, could be rescued by trickery
surripio -- to take away secretly; to steal, filch;
corripio -- to seize, snatch up, grasp, collect, take hold of, arrest, to start up, carried away, To carry off, take as plunder, snatch away, To attack, seize, catch, sweep, carry away, To contract, shorten, To hurry over, make haste over, To quicken, to reproach, reprove, chide, blame, under this rebuke, To seize upon, attack, fascinated
abripio -- to take forcibly away, snatch away, tear from, force off, stolen, shall be dragged, to run away, to dissipate, squander, will snatch away in a lump, to carry off, remove, detach, made unlike him
deripio -- to tear off, tear away, snatch away, remove violently, pull down
diripio -- to tear asunder, tear in pieces, To lay waste, ravage, spoil, plunder, pillage, seized and divided, strip, steal, To tear away, snatch away
adripio -- to snatch, catch hurriedly, grasp, seize, To seize, lay hold of, has buttonholed, arrested for, To take, appropriate, seize, embrace, usurp, make haste to, seize, to me, To seize upon, learn, To ridicule, attack, satirize
obripo -- int., vulg. c. obrepo
eripio -- to tear out, snatch away, wrest, pluck, tear, take away, To rescue, deliver, free, reflex., to break away, rescue oneself, escape, to take away, snatch away, take violently, remove, deprive, free, caught up eagerly, was lost, flee, the power of speech, I shall scarcely destroy your desire
__rip2
praeripia -- places on the banks of a river
__sag
a coarse woollen blanket, rough mantle, A military cloak, a military cloak, war-dress, under arms, would have fought % a wisewoman, fortune-teller, sooth-sayer, witch % to perceive keenly, discern acutely
praesagio -- to feel in advance, perceive beforehand, have a presentiment, forebode
praesagium -- a presentiment, foreboding, presage
praesagior -- c. praesagio.
praesago -- to forebode, presage, have a presentiment of
__tur
praetura -- the office of a praetor, praetorship*
obturo -- to stuff, stop up, close, refuse to listen
returo -- to open, unstop
antura -- ??
__su
sutura -- a sewing together, seam, suture
__mulg
to milk (an animal); to extract (milk);
immulgeo -- to milk into
__promulg
promulgo -- to bring forward publicly, propose openly, publish, promulgate
__prop
propinquo -- to draw near, come nigh, approach, To bring near, bring on, hasten, accelerate
propinquum -- neighborhood, vicinity
__pugn
a hand-to-hand fight, fight at close quarters, battle, combat, action, engagement, the single combat, came to blows, a cavalry action, the games, Troops drawn up for battle, a line of battle, the middle line, A battle, contest, dispute, quarrel, will make some new trouble, stories of battle % a fist, in boxing % to fight, combat, give battle, engage, contend, on horseback, the fighting goes on, To contend, dispute, To contend against, oppose, resist, contradict, struggle with, you contradicted yourself, cold bodies contended with hot, love for the mother and love for the sister, was resisted by the healing art, To struggle, strive, endeavor, make exertion, strive for what will smite me % 
propugno -- to go forth to fight, sally, make sorties
compugno -- To fight, contend together
depugno -- to fight decisively, fight out, join battle, combat
expugno -- to take by assault, storm, capture, reduce, subdue
repugno -- to fight back, oppose, make resistance, resist, struggle, defend oneself
adpugno -- to attack, assault;
inpugno -- to fight against, to attack, assail
oppugno -- to fight against, attack, assail, assault, storm, besiege, war with, to attack, assault, assail, contend
__serp
to creep, crawl, to move slowly, pass imperceptibly, creep along, proceed gradually, to creep, crawl, extend gradually, grow imperceptibly, m&lt;*&gt;e way stealthily, spread abroad, increase, prevail, to crawl, be low % serpo
proserpo -- to creep forward;
disserpo -- to creep about, to spread imperceptibly
perserpo -- to creep perpetually, to crawl
deserpo -- to creep down
inserpo -- to crcep on, over
reserpo -- int., ramper vers
__lang
to become faint, grow weak, sink, be enfeebled, is obscured, droops, mellows, languish, to grow languid, become listless, sink, decline, decrease
relanguesco -- to sink down, grow languid, become faint
oblanguesco -- to become feeble, languish
elanguesco -- to begin to lose one's vigor, droop, flag; to slacken, relax;
__muner
to give, present; % to give, bestow, present, honor, reward
remuneror -- to repay, reward, recompense, remunerate
remunero -- Pass.
demuneror -- to fee, bribe
__semin=semen
seminarium -- a nursery, seminary, hot-bed, school
seminaria -- grainetière
__ig=ag
subigito -- to dishonor, lie with
obigito -- to disturb
__sten=tend
sustento -- to hold up, hold upright, uphold, support, prop, sustain, to keep up, uphold, sustain, maintain, cherish, support, bear, uplift, preserve, To feed, nourish, support, sustain, maintain, To bear, hold out, endure, suffer, a defence was made, To put off, defer, delay, To check, hold back, restrain
sustentus -- action de se tenir en haut [en nageant] / soutien
ostento -- to present to view, show, exhibit, offer, To show off, exhibit, display, parade, make a display of, boast, vaunt, exhibit themselves.&mdash;To hold up, To hold out, offer, proffer, promise, To hold out, threaten, menace, To show, signify, disclose
ostentus -- a showing, display, sign, proof, A pretence
ostentum -- a prodigy, wonder, portent
__tragoed
tragoedia -- a tragedy, Tragedy, the art of tragedy
tragoedus -- a tragic actor, tragedian
__ig=ag
transigo -- to drive through, stab through, pierce through, transfix, transpierce, to carry through, bring to an end, finish, settle, complete, conclude, perform, accomplish, despatch, transact, if all is over, to settle, come to a settlement, agree, reach an understanding, cum, to make an end of, put an end to, have done with, to bring to an end, lead, pass, spend
prodigium -- a prophetic sign, token, omen, portent, prodigy, a monstrous and unnatural crime, A monster, prodigy, Cerberus
prodigo -- to squander, waste
prodigius -- latin vulgaire) = prodigium
ambigo -- to go about, go around, avoid, to hesitate, waver, doubt, be in doubt about, of which there is a doubt, is uncertain, cannot be doubted, To argue, dispute, contend, debate, there was no dispute
ambiga -- the cap of a still
ambiguum -- -I. doubt, uncertainty -II. an obscure, dark saying
redigo -- to drive back, force back, lead back, bring back, to bring back, force back, recall, coerced, To get together, call in, collect, raise, receive, take up, paid into the public treasury, to reduce, bring down, diminish, To bring down, bring, reduce, force, compel, subdue, bring down, reduce to a province, reduce to poverty, render empty and useless, had made it certain, two acc., to make, render, cause to be
subigo -- to drive up, bring up, drive up stream, To turn up from beneath, break up, dig up, plough, cultivate, work, knead, rub down, sharpen, whet, tame, break, easy to be tamed, to put down, overcome, conquer, subjugate, subject, subdue, reduce, To bring, incite, impel, force, compel, constrain, reduce, to cultivate, train, discipline
abigo -- to drive away, drive off, to drive away, carry off, to force a birth, to drive away, repel, expel
abiga -- a plant which has the power of producing abortion;, ground-pine
abigeo -- - tr. - Cypr. détourner, enlever (le bétail).
abigeus -- one that drives away, a cattle-stealer
adigo -- to drive, urge, bring by force, take, compelled to come before an arbiter, to ram in, to drive home, plunge, thrust, reach its mark, inflicted, to drive, urge, force, compel, bring, pressed, brought into the form of a ship, to put on oath, bind by oath, cause to take an oath, swear, takes the oath under compulsion
exigo -- to drive out, push forth, thrust out, take out, expel, divorce, turn out of the house, pours into the sea, by the thrust, passed through, To drive away, hiss off, To require, enforce, exact, demand, collect, demand the construction of, further confirmation, To export, To set right, set precisely upright, to require, demand, claim, exact, insist, has cost, to lead, spend, pass, complete, finish, close, after a long life, in old age, at the end of every year, To conduct, superintend, To bring to an end, conclude, finish, complete, To determine, ascertain, find out, discoveries, before he has ascertained, To weigh, try, prove, measure, examine, adjust, estimate, consider, estimate by the standard of, directed, To consider, deliberate on, take counsel upon
exiguum -- a little, a trifle. Adv. shortly, briefly; slightly, scantily, sparingly.
inigo -- To drive into, to, to drive
__sil
see ilia
transilio -- to leap across, jump over, spring over, overleap, to have extended, to hasten over, skip over, pass by, neglect, omit, To exceed, transgress, go beyond
absilio -- to rush/fly away (from); to burst/fly apart;
conila -- -I. a plant, also called -II. a plant, a species of#
suile -- a hog-sty#
__sed=sede
sedile -- that may be sat on, a seat, bench, stool, chair, benches
__mend
a fault, blemish % a fault, error, blunder, A blemish, defect, a mistake, omission
commendo -- to commit for protection, intrust, confide, deposit with, to intrust, commit, confide, to commend, To commend, recommend, ask favor for, make agreeable, render acceptable, grace
immendo -- to involve in a fault, implicate
__plor
to cry out, wail, lament, weep aloud, weep over, bewail, I bid you howl, wouldst grieve, pour out his sorrow to, a disappointed appetite
comploro -- to bewail, lament loudly:
perploro -- to weep greatly
deploro -- to weep bitterly, moan, wail, lament, complain
exploro -- to cause to flow forth, bring out, search out, examine, investigate, explore
imploro -- to invoke with tears, To call to help, call for aid, appeal to, invoke, beseech, entreat, implore, To pray for, beg earnestly, implore
apploro -- to bewail, deplore, weep:
opploro -- to cry, wail at, against, in
__prob
to make good, esteem good, approve, esteem, commend, declared him capable of bearing arms, To make good, represent as good, recommend, make acceptable, show, won favor with, has pleased.&mdash;To make credible, show, prove, demonstrate, my fatherly anxiety proves me your father, To test, inspect, try, judge by trial, accepted after inspection, To represent, pass off for, pass for % a proof
comprobo -- to approve, assent to, sanction, acknowledge:
approbo -- to assent to, favor, approve:,
improbo -- to disapprove, blame, condemn, reject
reprobo -- to disapprove, reject, condemn
__laud
to praise, laud, commend, honor, extol, eulogize, approve, to your face, extols his happiness, praise for swiftness, approve, Colloq.: Sy, De, I am glad of it, To eulogize, pronounce a funeral oration over, To compliment, dismiss with a compliment, turn from, To adduce, name, quote, cite, refer to
conlaudo -- to prize highly, extol:
adlaudo -- to extol, to praise much
dilaudo -- to distinguish by praise, eulogize
3800
exlaudo -- - tr. - louer outre mesure.
elaudo -- tr., citer avec éloge
alauda -- The lark#
__sibil
to hiss, whistle % a hissing, a whistling
exsibilo -- to hiss out, hiss from the stage
adsibilo -- to hiss, murmur, whisper at, to, verb act.
insibilo -- to whistle within
obsibilo -- to whistle away, to rustle
resibilo -- to hiss at
__abroton
abrotonum -- an aromatic plant, southern-wood (a medicine),
abrotonus -- a plant of a pleasant, aromatic smell, southernwood;
__absinth
absinthium -- absinthe (plante amère).
absinthius -- wormwood
__stant=sto
abstantia -- distance
distantia -- remoteness, diversity
__tern
absterno -- - tr. - rejeter, repousser.
conterno -- to put three things together, to make threefold, P. a.
disterno -- to spread out, Impers.
__allig
adalligo -- to bind to, to fasten to, to attach
inalligo -- tr., lier sur
__decim
To select by lot every tenth man for punishment, to decimate.
addecimo -- to take by the tenth part, to tithe
edecimo -- to pick out, select
__frang
to break in pieces, dash to pieces, shiver, shatter, fracture, suffer shipwreck, strangle, tear in pieces, shorten, To break up, grind, bruise, crush, To break, to break down, subdue, overcome, crush, dishearten, weaken, diminish, violate, soften, my fortune was lost, calamities, come to naught, fail in, subsides
adfrango -- - 1 - briser contre. - 2 - appuyer violemment contre.
defrango -- abbrechen
__gnas=nas
adgnascor -- To be born in addition to;
agnascor -- to be born in addition (i. e. after a father's will was made):
__mutil
to cut off, lop off, cut short, clip, crop, maim, mutilate, To shorten, diminish, lessen, rob
admutilo -- to crop, clip close, to shave;, to defraud, cheat, fleece one of his money
demutilo -- to lop off
__nihil
US
adnihilo -- to bring to nothing, to annihilate;
annihilo -- to bring to nothing, to annihilate;
__uol
a flying, flight, sing, plur
aduolatus -- an approach by flying
inuolatus -- a flying, flight; only
__tim
aeditimor -- to keep, take care of a temple, aedituor.
aeditimus -- old for aedituus.
__tum=tim
aeditumor -- to keep, take care of a temple, aedituor.
aeditumus -- gardien d'un temple.
__aegilop
aegilopa -- A disease of the eyes, a lachrymal fistula, a tumor in the inner corner of the eye
aegilopium -- a disease of the eyes, a lachrymal fistula, an ulcer in the inner corner of the eye
__amn
amniculus -- a rivulet
__ren
reniculus -- a little kidney
reniculi -- dim. de renes
__sen
seniculus -- a little old man
__amygdal
amygdala -- An almond
amygdalum -- an almond, almond kernel, O.
amygdalus -- an almond-tree
__cen
a dinner, principal meal (anciently taken at noon, afterwards later): % to dine, take a meal, eat dinner, P. perf, having dined, after dinner, To make a meal of, eat, dine upon % - 1 - boue, fange, bourbier. - 2 - Plaut. homme infâme, une ordure. % Mittag speisen
antecenium -- a meal taken before the principal meal, a lunch, luncheon
concena -- Gloss. convive.
perceno -- - intr. - achever de dîner.
subceno -- to eat below, dine underneath
inceno -- to dine there, to dine in, at a place
secena -- Andr. instrument tranchant.
__log
archives % that part of the stage on which the actors spoke, the pulpitum
antelogium -- a prologue, preamble
prologium -- a preface, introduction
elogium -- an utterance, short saying, maxim
elogio -- to describe briefly, to state
alogia -- Irration al conduct, action, folly
alogior -- déraisonner.
__nuc
anucella -- doub. dim., a little old woman
__auc
aucella -- a little bird
aucellus -- c. le préc.
__lustr
aplustra -- v. aplustre.
aplustre -- an ornament of wood on the stern of a ship:*
__apost
apostata -- an apostate
apostato -- to forsake one's religion, to apostatize
__apost
apostola -- Aug. femme apôtre.
apostolus -- a notice sent to a higher tribunal, judge
apostoli -- lettre qui renvoie une cause à une juridiction supérieure
__propr
to appropriate % a possession, property
approprio -- to make one's own, to appropriate
improprium -- something improper, impropriety, faultiness
__fol
aquifolia -- houx.
aquifolium -- the holly-tree, the scarlet holm
__arane
araneola -- a small spider
araneolus -- petite araignée.
__armorac
armoracea -- horseradish
armoracia -- raifort.
armoracium -- horseradish
__aruspic
aruspica -- a female haruspex, soothsayer
aruspicium -- inspection of victims, divination
__ascet
asceteria -- a place of abode for ascetics, a hermitage
asceterium -- couvent, monastère.
__sat
to fill, glut, cloy, satiate, To fill, furnish abundantly, saturate, color richly, to fill, satisfy, content, sate, her old grudge not yet assuaged % a mixture, hotchpotch, at random, confusedly, pell-mell, A satire, poetic medley set to music and sung on the stage, after the appearance of satires, A satire, poem of manners, didactic poem
assatura -- roasted meat
exsaturo -- to satisfy satiate, sate
obsaturo -- to sate, cloy
__sic
a little dagger, the penis
assiculus -- A small axle-tree
ensiculus -- coutelas, poignard.
__aug
augmento -- to increase
augmentum -- an increase, growth, augmentation
__coclear
coclearium -- An enclosure, pen in which snails were kept and fed
cocleare -- a spoon, a measure for liquids, a spoonful
coclearum -- a spoon, a measure for liquids, a spoonful
__cod
codicula -- a little tail
codiculus -- c. codicillus.
__dic
indiculus -- a short list, catalogue
__cog
cogitatum -- a thought, reflection, notion, idea, purpose
cogitata -- reflections, thoughts, ideas
__libr
a balance, pair of scales, by scale and baiance, in due form, without legal formalities, the Balance, A plummet, level, by the level, of equal height, a pound, Roman pound % to poise, balance, hold in equilibrium, are swayed, sway, To swing, sway, brandish, hurl, dash, cast, launch, fling, throw, stretch
collibro -- to measure off
perlibro -- to make exactly level, to level.
delibro -- to take off the rind, bark, peel#
selibra -- a half-pound
__liqu
to become fluid, melt, liquefy, putrefy, To grow soft, become effeminate, To melt, waste away
colliquesco -- to become fluid, to liquefy, melt, dissolve
colliquiae -- channels, drains, gutters for conducting water in the fields, upon the roofs of buildings
3900
deliquesco -- to melt away, dissolve, melt
deliquia -- a gutter
deliquium -- -I. a want, defect, an eclipse -II. a flowing down, dropping down
eliquesco -- to become liquid
eliquium -- An outlet;
__liqu=linqu
reliquiae -- what is left, a remainder, leavings, remains, relics, remnant, rest, not slain by the Greeks, excrements, The leavings, remains, remnants, fr&lt;*&gt;g&lt;*&gt;ents, Antony should have fallen with Caesar, the remains, relics, ashes, remnants, remains, remainder, rest, your ancestor's unfinished work
__colocas
colocasium -- an Egyptian bean, marsh-lily, V.
colocasia -- an Egyptian bean;
__colostr
colostra -- the first milk after delivery, the biestings
colostrum -- the first milk after delivery, the biestings
__bull
a water-bubble, bubble: % to bubble, form bubbles % to be in bubbling motion, to be in a state of ebullition, to bubble. % - intr. - bouillonner, bouillir.
combullio -- to boil fully
conbullio -- to boil fully
perbullio -- to boil thoroughly
subbullio -- to foam, bubble slightly
debullio -- - intr. - Rufin. pulluler, foisonner.
rebullio -- I. Neutr., to bubble up II. Act., to cause to bubble forth, to cast forth with a bubbling noise
ebullio -- to boil over
ebullo -- I. Neutr., to boil up, bubble up II. Act., to breathe out, give up the ghost; To produce in abundance
__marc
to be faint, droop, be feeble, be languid, P. praes. % to become weak, grow feeble, pine away, waste, languish
commarceo -- to wither;, to become wholly faint, inactive
commarcesco -- - intr. - devenir languissant.
demarcesco -- to fade away, wither
obmarcesco -- to fall away, grow lean
__parc
comparco -- to save, husband well, lay up
reparco -- to spare; to be sparing; to restrain;
deparco -- - tr. - épargner, ménager.
imparco -- to spare
__plan
a plane % - intr. - P.-Nol. s'aplanir. % to level, make plain, flat, even % level ground, a plain
complano -- to level, make even, raze:
displano -- to level away, to level
explano -- to make plain, make clear, explain
deplano -- to level off, to make level, even
implano -- to deceive, delude
applano -- aplanir
__pluu
rain, a shower, fall of rain % the inner court of a dwelling
compluuium -- a quadranguiar open space in the middle of a Roman house, which collected the rain-water flowing from the roofs and conducted it to a basin, placed below
perpluuium -- grande pluie
impluuium -- a small court open to the sky
__posc
to ask urgently, beg, demand, request, desire, beg, if he require it, demands for punishment, require the prosecution of, it is I that Olympus summons, invoke, they ask you for the entrails, they demand of me, challenge with larger goblets, to make necessary, demand, require, need, call for % an acidulous drink of vinegar and water
composco -- - tr. - demander à la fois.
deposco -- to demand, require, request earnestly, call for
exposco -- to ask earnestly, beg, request, entreat, implore
reposco -- to demand back, ask again
apposco -- to demand besides:
__call
to be callous, to be experienced, be skilful, be versed, To know by experience, be skilled in, have the knowledge of, un, derstand, to know how % a hard skin, thick skin, insensibility, callousness % The hardened, thick skin upon animal bodies, Plur.
concallesco -- to grow hard, to become insensible
percallesco -- to become hardened, grow callous
percalleo -- to know, understand well
incallo -- to render callous
incallesco -- dickhäutig werden
occallesco -- to grow callous, harden, thicken to a snout, to grow insensible
__carn
concarno -- to unite, clothe with flesh, to incarnate
decarno -- to take off the flesh
incarno -- to make flesh;, pass.
__cerr
a kind of oak, Turkey oak
concerra -- a playfellow
acerra -- a casket for incense#
__cruc
to put to the rack, torture, torment, to afflict, grieve, torment, am on the rack
concrucio -- to torment, rack, torture severely
concrucior -- pass. [de l'inus. concrucio, torturer], souffrir totalement
discrucio -- to rack to pieces, torture
percrucio -- to torment, vex greatly
excrucio -- to torment, torture, rack, plague
incrucio -- to torture greatly
__dens
to make thick, thicken, pack, close, press, hurl a shower of, darkens % int., s'épaissir, s'obscurcir % to make thick, thicken, press, pack, close
condenseo -- to make very dense, to condense, to press close together
condenso -- - tr. - rendre compact, condenser, épaissir; serrer, grouper.
addenseo -- to crowd together:
addenso -- eagerly:*
__ferc
confercio -- see confertus.
effercio -- to stuff, cram, fill out
infercio -- to stuff in, force in
refercio -- to fill up, stuff, cram, to pack close, condense, mass together, To fill full, cram
__feru
to grow hot;
conferuesco -- to begin to boil, grow hot
deferuesco -- to cease raging, cool down, be allayed, be assuaged
efferuesco -- to boil up, boil over, to ferment, effervesce, rage, To light up, glow
inferuesco -- to boil, stew, simmer
referuesco -- to boil up, bubble over
__fort
to become brave
conforto -- to strengthen much
confortio -- et fortis), raffermir, renforcer
__garr
to chatter, prate, prattle, chat, you talk idly
congarrio -- to gabble much, to prattle
aggarrio -- - intr. - adresser des sornettes à.
__glor
glory, fame, renown, praise, honor, a monopoly of glory, Thirst for glory, ambition, vainglory, pride, vaunting, boasting, vanity, Splendor, richness, An ornament, pride, fine horns % to boast, vaunt, glory, brag, pride oneself, in him as father-in-law
conglorior -- être glorifié ensemble.
ingloria -- absence de gloire.
__quin
conquinisco -- to cower down, squat, stoop down
conquino -- to defile all over, to pollute wholly, to contaminate.
inquino -- to befoul, stain, pollute, defile
anquina -- the rope by which the sail-yard is bound to the mast#
obquinisco -- to bend down, to stoop
oquinisco -- to bend down, to stoop
__coq
coquina -- - 1 - cuisine. - 2 - science culinaire, art de la cuisine.
coquino -- to perform the office of a cook
__sarc
to patch, botch, mend, repair, restore, make good, to make good, make amends for, make compensation for, correct, repair, restore % Inscr. chair.
consarcio -- - tr. - coudre ensemble.
exsarcio -- to patch, mend, repair
insarcio -- to stuff in
resarcio -- to patch up, mend, repair, restore
__socr
Masc., a fatherin-law, Fem., a mother-in-law
consocrus -- a joint father-in-law, mother-in-law; one of two fathers-in-law, mothers-in-law; masc., Fem.
prosocrus -- a wife's grandmother
__somn
a dream, Dreams, the sleep of death, A dream, whim, fancy, stuff, nonsense % sleep, in sleep, protract slumber, causing sleep, to watch over, of day and night, death, a divinity, son of Erebus and Nox, Sleep, sloth, drowsiness, inactivity, slumber, idleness % to dream, sees in a dream, To dream, think idly, imagine, I had vaguely in mind % v. somnio
consomnio -- to dream of
insomnium -- a dream. / sleeplessness
insomnia -- sleeplessness, want of sleep, watching
exsomnio -- - 1 - tr. - éveiller. - 2 - intr. - s'éveiller.
__spol
to strip, uncover, bare, unclothe, To rob, plunder, pillage, spoil, deprive, despoil, strip, impoverish, the spoiler, stripped of his locks % the skin, hide, fell, the arms stripped from an enemy, booty, prey, spoil, arms, victory % dépouille d'un animal / toison / peau d'un serpent qui mue / ordint au pl., dépouille guerrière, butin
conspolio -- to rob
conspolium -- a kind of sacrificial cake#
despolio -- to rob, plunder, despoil
despolior -- - dép. tr. - c. despolio.
exspolio -- to spoil, pillage, plunder
exspolior -- c. exspolio.
4000
__suau
embrasser, baiser. % to kiss % a kiss; see savium
consuauio -- to kiss much, affectionately
consuauior -- to kiss much, affectionately
dissuauior -- to kiss ardently
__torp
to be stiff, be numb, be inactive, be torpid, numb, to be stupid, be stupefied, be dull, be inactive, are lost in admiration, are feeble, if you are surprised out of your self-possession
contorpeo -- - intr. - être tout engourdi.
extorpeo -- c. torpeo
extorpesco -- to grow numb, torpid
intorpeo -- to be very stiff, numb
obtorpeo -- to be numb
obtorpesco -- to grow stiff, be benumbed, become insensible, lose feeling.&mdash;Only
retorpesco -- to become torpid, med.
__uerg
to bend, turn, be inclined, lie, be situated, to turn, incline, be directed, verges towards, advanced, everything centred in him % v. vergo § 2.
conuergo -- to incline together
aduergo -- int., tendre vers
deuergium -- détours.
deuergo -- to incline downwards, to sink
diuergium -- a point of separation, water-shed
inuergo -- to incline, pour upon
reuergo -- to incline towards, to tend, conduce
euergo -- to send out, cause to meander forth*
__uesc
to use as food, take for food, take food, feed upon, eat % to feed
conuescor -- to eat with one
deuescor -- to eat up, devour
euescor -- se repaître
__uiol
to treat with violence, injure, dishonor, outrage, violate, has shocked, to dye blood-red, to invade, violate, profane, to violate, outrage, dishonor, break, injure, To perform an act of sacrilege, do outrageously, perpetrate, act unjustly, injurious % the violet, gillyflower
conuiolo -- to violate, desecrate
obuiolo -- to violate
inuiolo -- not to violate
euiolo -- to violate
__obaud
to obey, absol.
coobaudio -- - tr. - comprendre en même temps.
inobaudio -- to disobey, be disobedient
__copul
copulatum -- a joint sentence, called also
epulatus -- repas, festin, banquet.#
__racin
coracino -- to caw, croak
coracinum -- noir de corbeau
__buc
to give signal with/sound trumpet/horn; to blow trumpet (bucina); to honk (Cal); % a trumpet, horn, at the third watch, a trumpet-call, Triton's horn, &lt;*&gt;der's trumpet % The sound, blast of a trumpet, a quarter in Rome
debucino -- to trumpet forth
dibucino -- to trumpet forth
__cin
to turn, to ashes % a kind of salve
decineresco -- to be wholly reduced to ashes
incinero -- réduire en cendres
__cip=cap
decipulum -- a snare, gin, trap.
excipulum -- - 1 - vase pour recevoir. - 2 - épieu [pour la chasse].
__crust
a hard loaf, cake, pastry % to cover with a rind, shell, incrustation, plaster-work, embossed figures, Subst. % a hard surface, rind, shell, crust, bark, a crust of ice, Inlaid work, chasing, embossed work, stucco, mosaic, chased cups
decrusto -- to peel off, split off, disintegrate
incrusto -- to coat, incrust
__lapid
delapido -- To clear from stones
delapidor -- d., tr., arch. pour delapido
dilapido -- to throw away, squander, consume
__litig
to dispute, quarrel, strive, To sue, go to law, litigate % a dispute, quarrel, strife
delitigo -- to scold, rail angrily
elitigo -- c. litigo :
__plang
to strike, beat, beats with its wings, To beat in lamentation, beat themselves in agony, To lament aloud, wail, To bewail, lament for % sorte d'aigle
deplango -- to bewail, lament (by beating the breast, etc.)
diplangium -- a double vessel
__pocul
depoculo -- - intr. - voler des coupes (mot forgé).
apoculo -- to go away, to remove oneself, to leave;*
__praed
property taken in war, booty, spoil, plunder, pillage, Prey, game, vow to offer a share, Booty, spoil, gain, profit, treasure trove, drew great advantage % a farm, estate, manor, city lots % to make booty, plunder, spoil, rob, upon every opportunity, make use of another's ignorance to defraud him, Supin. acc., To take, catch, make prey of, to rob, ravish, take, has &lt;*&gt;aught me % to learn beforehand, make one's self acquainted with beforehand
depraedor -- act., to plunder, pillage, ravage, pass.
depraedo -- tr., c. depraedor / part. à sens passif
__sculp
to carve, cut, grave, chisel, form, fashion
desculpo -- to carve out, to copy by carving, graving
exsculpo -- to dig out, cut out, chisel out, carve
insculpo -- to cut in, carve upon, engrave
resculpo -- to carve, form again;, to restore, renew
__spern
to separate, to despise, contemn, reject, scorn, spurn % to despise
desperno -- to despise greatly, disdain
asperno -- to despise, scorn, disdain; to spurn, push away, repel, reject; to refuse, decline;
aspernor -- to disdain, reject, despise, refuse, consented, with the consent of, to be averse.&mdash;Pass.
__squam
a scale, Fish-scales, a fish, a scale, layer, of two layers
desquamo -- to scale off, to scale
exsquamo -- schälen
__subul
desubulo -- to bore in deeply
insubulo -- tr., enrouler sur l'ensouple
__chalc
a copper coin % brazen things
dichalcum -- a small coin, the fourth, the fifth) part of an obolus
exchalceo -- - tr. - dépouiller de son argent [jeu de mot avec le mot latin excalceo].
__dictamn
dictamnum -- -I. no. -II. the plant dittany
dictamnus -- dittany (an herb)
__fla
a blowing, breathing, snorting, of his breath, a breath, breeze, pride, haughtiness % to blow.
difflatus -- a blowing in an opposite direction
sufflatus -- puffed up, bloated
adflatus -- a blowing on, breeze, blast, breath, by the effluvia, by his breath, inspiration
efflatus -- issue pour l'air, pour le vent.
__lucid
dilucido -- - tr. - Tert. éclaircir, rendre clair.
elucido -- to light, enlighten
__luc
a small grove
diluculat -- it grows light, it dawns;
illuculasco -- to break, dawn
__iurg
a quarrel, strife, dispute, altercation, contention, quarrel, reproaches % to quarrel, brawl, dispute, scold, with expostulation, is reproached % - 1 - plaider. - 2 - quereller. - 3 - se plaindre. % tr., invectiver, injurier
disiurgium -- a difference, quarrel
obiurgo -- to chide, scold, blame, rebuke, reprove
obiurgor -- Virg. c. objurgo.
abiurgo -- to deny, refuse reproachfully
__perd
to make away with, destroy, ruin, squander, dissipate, throw away, waste, lose % to learn thoroughly, get by heart
disperdo -- to spoil, ruin
deperdo -- to lose permanently/utterly (destruction); to be deprived/desperate; to destroy, ruin;
__taed
a resinous pine-tree, pitch-pine % weariness, irksomeness, tediousness, loathing, disgust % to feel loathing, disgust, to be weary, med.
distaedet -- it is wearisome, is disgusting
pertaedeo -- - intr. - dégoûter.
extaedior -- être accablé de dégoût
obtaedesco -- to disgust
__eclog
eclogarii -- select passages
eclogarium -- a collection of selected poems
__ellebor
elleboro -- to purify with hellebore
elleborum -- hellebore
elleborus -- hellebore (a remedy for mental diseases)
__luc
to work by lamp-light, work at night, composed by night
elucubro -- to work out at night, toil over
elucubror -- to work out at night, toil over
__embroch
embrocha -- a wet poultice
embrocho -- tr., envelopper (
__empir
empiricus -- a physician guided by experience
empirica -- empiricism, a system founded wholly on practice
__equiset
equiseta -- no.
equisetum -- hippuris ou prêle des bois [plante]
__sedar
essedaria -- Petr. femme qui conduit un essedum.
essedarius -- a fighter in a war-chariot
__euphorb
euphorbea -- an African plant
euphorbeum -- an African plant
4100
euphorbia -- euphorbe (plante).
__hered
an hereditary estate
exheredo -- to disinherit.
inheredo -- to appoint as an heir
__suffl
Act., to blow forth from below; to blow up, puff out, inflate.
exsufflo -- To blow away
insufflo -- to blow, breathe into, upon, Absol.
obsufflo -- to blow against, at
__bract
metallic foil, goldleaf: % pass.
imbracteo -- to overlay with leafmetal
imbractum -- sauce piquante
__clang
to clang, to sound, resound
inclango -- - tr. - faire retentir.
reclango -- to re-echo, resound
__inter
an old woman, matron, old wife, old maid: % - intr. - Plaut. devenir vieille, être vieille.
interaneum -- intestin
interanea -- intestins
__man
emano -- to flow out; to arise, emanate from, become known;
__mane
emaneo -- To stay without, remain beyond
amaneo -- - intr. - découcher.
__inan
inanesco -- to become empty
inaniae -- emptiness
inanio -- to make empty, to empty out, evacuate
inane -- an empty space, void, open space, vanity, worthlessness, as an idle show
__uis
to go to see, visit
inuisito -- - tr. - visiter souvent.
reuisito -- to visit again, revisit
__ocell
ocellati -- - 1 - petites pierres précieuses. - 2 - petits cailloux (pour jouer), billes.
ocellatum -- a small stone marked with eyes, spots, like dice
__oeconom
oeconomia -- the management of household affairs, domestic economy;, a proper division, arrangement, economy
oeconomus -- a housekeeper, steward, overseer
__ag
to set in violent motion, drive onward, move, impel, urge, drive to pasture, rowed about, To hunt, chase, pursue, to drive, urge forward, press, support, insist on, keep pressing this one point, To attend, keep, celebrate, To observe, obey, carry out, exercise, to pass, spend, to live, abide, be, remain, To move to and fro, stir, agitate, shake, disturb, toss, brandish, fanned, wield, nod, tossed, tossing up spray, to stir, rouse, agitate, stimulate, excite, goad, animates, To vex, disquiet, disturb, distress, in times of disorder, was distracted by, to disturb the loyalty, To insult, scoff, rail at, deride, revile, neatly mocked. &mdash; To prosecute, occupy oneself with, engage in, keep going, stir, keep active, so conducted himself, represented, To pursue, consider, deliberate on, meditate, To discuss, debate, sift, investi, gate, sifted, discussed, by the accounts, there were discussions
peragito -- to drive, hunt about greatly, to harass, disturb
subagito -- to lie with illicitly
exagito -- to rouse, keep in motion, disquiet, harass, persecute, disturb, torment, vex
coagito -- to shake together
obagito -- Enn. harceler, pousser devant soi.
reagito -- - tr. - Not.-Tir. agiter de nouveau.
__coen
dinner/supper, principle Roman meal (evening); course; meal; company at dinner; % to take a meal, to dine, eat % S
percoeno -- - intr. - achever de dîner. (Lebaigue P. 913)
subcoeno -- - intr. - entamer un repas par dessous, manger les restes.
occoeno -- 
__creb
to become frequent, to increase, grow strong;, to spread abroad, perf., pluperf.
percrebesco -- - intr. - 1 - devenir commun, devenir fréquent, se multiplier. - 2 - se divulguer, se répandre partout, se répéter. - res (fama) percrebuit + prop. inf. : le bruit se répandit que.
increbesco -- to become frequent, strong, to increase, gain ground, prevail, spread
__iamb
an iambic foot, iambus
periambus -- A metrical foot, consisting of two short syllaoles
diiambus -- a double iambus
__pasc
to cause to eat, feed, supply with food, To feed, nourish, maintain, support, feed with vegetables, To pasture, drive to pasture, attend, to be fed, feed, graze, pasture, chews the cud, To feed, supply, cherish, cultivate, let grow, fed, feeds, pile up debts, To pasture, give as pasture, To graze, browse, To consume, lay waste, ravage, desolate, to feast, delight, satisfy, feed, gratify, cherish, feast myself, live by % see pasco % a pasture % (sc. terra), a pasture
perpascor -- to lay waste, devastate
compascuum -- vaine pâture
compascua -- pâturage communal
depascor -- to eat up, feed on, consume
impascor -- to feed, be pastured in
__prem#
to press, to tread on, drove her chariot over the body, press upon, milk, grasp, champ, chew, with compressed teeth, cheese, make into cheese, hug the shore, To press out, express, obtain by pressing, balsam, express, To press upon, lie on, rest on, be upon, To cover, bury, suppress, hide, buried, repressing, To cover, crown, adorn, To press hard, bear upon, crowd, throng, pursue closely, thronged, kill, chase, To press down, burden, load, freight, on whose back she sat, loaded, To press down, depress, cause to sink, is depressed, rest on your couches, To mark, impress, written, To set out, plant, layers, To press down, make deep, impress, draw a furrow, To press close, compress, close, shut, strangle, stop the breath, choked, To shorten, keep down, prune, To check, arrest, To visit frequently, frequent, to press, be pressing, burden, oppress, overwhelm, weigh down, To press, press upon, urge, drive, importune, pursue, press hard, urge, to be importuned, by his inspiration, To follow up, press home, urge, dwell upon, laid to heart, To cover, hide, conceal, To lower, pull down, humble, degrade, disparage, depreciate, kept him down, opposed his candidacy, To compress, abridge, condense, To check, arrest, repress, restrain, to be silent, To surpass, exceed, overshadow, To keep down, rule
perprimo -- to press hard, press perpetually, lie upon
__supr
suprema -- Varr. Plin. le coucher du soleil, la tombée de la nuit (dernière division légale du jour).
supremum -- the last moment, end
__cetr#
a short Spanish shield
porcetra -- a sow that has once littered
excetra -- a snake, serpent, dragon
__ell#
to spend immoderately (eating/luxuries); to be a glutton; to squander
postella -- a crupper
amellus -- purple Italian starwort, V.
amella -- 
anellus -- a little ring
suellus -- petit porc
__cis
a light two-wheeled vehicle, cabriolet.
praecisum -- a piece of meat cut off, a cutlet, steak
concisa -- courts membres de phrase
incisum -- a section, division, clause
__coqu
to cook, prepare by cooking, bake, boil, roast, parch, steep, melt, heat, To burn, parch, bake, dry up, To ripen, make mature, To digest, To prepare by fire, firedried, to forge, to elaborate, think out, mature, plan, To vex, harass, disquiet, disturb % a cook % a female cook
praecoquo -- To boil beforehand
percoquo -- to ripen
concoquo -- to digest:
discoquo -- to boil to pieces, to boil thoroughly
subcoquo -- to cook a little, med.
decoquo -- to boil away, boil down, diminish by boiling
excoquo -- to boil out, melt out, dry up.
incoquo -- to boil down, boil, seethe
recoquo -- to boil again, renew by boiling
__cur
trouble, care, attention, pains, industry, diligence, exertion, art sets off, culture, rearing, friendly interest, more pressing business, nor let me try, management, attention to, service, as if the business in hand were, predicat., to be an object of (one's) care, to take care of, attend to, bestow pains upon, should be his business, that is just how I was occupied, Administration, charge, oversight, command, office, a guardian, overseer, the swine-herd Eumaeus, Study, reflection, A result of study, work, A means of healing, remedy, Anxiety, solicitude, concern, disquiet, trouble, grief, sorrow, The care of love, anxiety of love, love, A loved object, mistress, worthiest, Care, Cares, Anxieties % a court, curia, association, A house for the religious services of a curia, A senate-house, place of meeting of the senate, built by Pompey, the official building of the Salii on the Palatine Hill, the senate, the Areopagus % to care for, take pains with, be solicitous for, look to, attend to, regard, have taken tender care of, refresh, indulge, refreshed, see to, avert, don't be anxious about that, take care of your health, made preparations, it shall be seen to, gerundive, to have done, see to, order, To administer, govern, preside over, command, commanded, To heal, cure, To attend to, adjust, settle, pay, pay to his order % to crook, bend, bow, curve, round, by its weight, the flaming sickle, rolling, arched, cause to stoop, to make to yield, bend, move % 
praecuro -- to care for beforehand
concuro -- to attend to thoroughly/completely; to care for suitably (L+S);
concuruo -- to curve, bend
procuro -- to take care of, attend to, look after
procuruo -- to bend, curve forwards
percuro -- to heal thoroughly, cure completely
decuria -- a division of ten, decuria, decade, a division, company, class, decuria
incuria -- want of care, negligence, neglect
incuruo -- to bend, bow, curve
accuro -- to give close attention to, be careful:
excurio -- to eject from the curia, from the senate
excuro -- - tr. - examiner avec soin.
recuro -- to restore, refresh
recuruo -- to bend backward, turn back, winding
__cut=quas
tr., cutitus = stupratus
praecutio -- to shake before, brandish in front
concutio -- to strike together, To shake violently, shake, agitate, smite, shock, to wave, to brandish, with such a bit drives her in her frenzy, P. perf., to shake out, search, ransack, examine, exhaust your ingenuity, To shake, shatter, cause to waver, impair, disturb, shock, distract, To shake, agitate, excite, terrify, alarm, trouble, spurred themselves
discutio -- to strike asunder, dash to pieces, shatter, To break up, scatter, disperse, dissipate, remove, dispel, to remove, scatter, destroy, suppress
percutio -- to strike through and through, thrust through, pierce, transfix, the right place, To strike hard, beat, hit, smite, shoot, had been struck, struck by lightning, play, poorly woven, To slay, kill, behead, to smite, strike, visit, overwhelm, ruin, To strike, shock, impress, affect deeply, move, astound, it impressed me, To cheat, deceive, impose upon
succutio -- to fling up from below, fling aloft, toss up
excutio -- to shake out, shake off, cast out, drive out, send forth, shaken out, threw off, parry, uncoil and let out, shake off, be cast off, take myself off, shake, tossed, am roused, To project, throw, the poisoned cup, To shake out, search, to shake out, shake off, force away, discard, remove, wrest, extort, excite, reject, To search, examine, investigate, scrutinize
incutio -- to wield against, cause to strike, box the ear, to strike into, inspire with, inflict, excite, produce, make blush, bring bad news, make trouble
recutio -- to shake again, shock, P. perf
decutio -- to shake off, strike down, cast off
acuta -- aigu, pénétrant, fin [en parlant de l'intelligence] / [en parlant des sens] / [en parlant du style] fin, d'une simplicité qui porte, d'une précision pénétrante / [gram.] aigu
acuto -- tr., aiguiser
__fat
to confess, own, grant, acknowledge, To discover, show, indicate, manifest % to open in chinks, fall apart, tumble to pieces, opens, to grow weak, become exhausted, droop, faint % an utterance, prophetic declaration, oracle, prediction, That which is ordained, destiny, fate, beyond the natural course of events, will, nothing can resist fate, Bad fortune, ill fate, calamity, mishap, ruin, Fate, death, most unfortunate, to prolong life, to the last, A pest, plague, ruin, A symbol of fate, the lots, The Fates % c. fatisco. % - tr. - dire et redire, répéter. % to talk foolishly
praefatum -- préface
profatum -- maxime, sentence, précepte.
adfatus -- an accosting, speaking to
effatum -- an utterance, axiom
infatuo -- to make a fool of, infatuate
defatisco -- int., c. defetiscor
__foc
a fire-place, hearth, pile on wood, the funeral-pile, altars, fire-pans, fires, A hearth, home, family, families
praefoco -- to choke, strangle, suffocate
suffoco -- to throttle, choke, stifle, strangle, suffocate, to starve
perfoco -- to stifle, suffocate
offoco -- to choke, throttle;
4200
effoco -- to suffocate, smother.
__lib
it pleases, is pleasing/agreeable; (w/qui whatever, whichever, no matter); % a cake, pancake (flour, made up with milk or oil, and baked) % to take out as a sample, take a little of, To take a taste of, taste, sip, remnants, To pour out, offer as a libation, spill, sprinkle, make a drink-offering, of pure wine, To besprinkle, To offer, dedicate, consecrate, To touch lightly, graze, kissed lightly, To impair, to take out, cull, extract, gather, compile, collect % nom d'une mesure hébraïque. % a cake, pancake, masc.
praelibo -- to taste beforehand, foretaste*
collibeo -- it pleases, it is agreeable, act., pass.
collibet -- it pleases, it is agreeable, act., pass.
prolibo -- to pour out, offer as a libation, Impers. pass.
delibo -- to take, enjoy, pluck, gather
delibuo -- to besmear, anoint, verb. finit.
__mone
praemoneo -- to forewarn, admonish beforehand
promoneo -- to forewarn
submoneo -- to remind privily, hint
permoneo -- to admonish
admoneo -- to bring to mind, remind, suggest, put in mind of:
demoneo -- dissuader.
remoneo -- to warn again, remind
semones -- les demi-dieux.#
__neg
to say no, deny, refuse, they say I am not, Not to assent, deny, the proof of which can be suppressed, Not to consent, deny, refuse, will decline, refuse, does not produce, furl
praenego -- - tr. - nier à l'avance.
pernego -- to deny stoutly
subnego -- to deny in a measure, partly refuse
abnego -- to refuse, deny (poet.):
denego -- to reject, refuse, deny
__opt
to choose, select, prefer, three for each ship, To wish, wish for, desire, demand, pray for
praeopto -- to choose rather, desire more, prefer
redopto -- to wish for again
adopto -- to take by choice, select, choose, adopt:
coopto -- to choose, elect, admit by election, appoint to office
deopto -- choose, select;
exopto -- to wish earnestly, desire greatly, long for
__pil1
- 1 - piléus, bonnet (bonnet que porte l'esclave que l'on affranchit), bonnet d'affranchi. - 2 - affranchissement, indépendance, liberté. % a ball, playing-ball, the game of ball, A ballot % P % - tr. - coiffer du piléus (bonnet que porte l'esclave que l'on affranchit). % c. pileus. % a heavy javelin, pilum, a place in the forum where the arms of the Curiatii were set up, you wish at least for pomp % to ram down;, to thrust home
praepilo -- to point in front, at the end like a*
compilo -- to plunder, pillage, rifle, rob:
suppilo -- to steal underhand, to filch, pilfer, purloin; to rob, strip, pluck, fleece
propilo -- abschießen
expilo -- to pillage, rob, plnnder
oppilo -- to stop up, shut up
depilor -- piller, voler, dépouiller.
__pil2
impilia -- felt shoes
depilo -- to pull out the hair, pluck out the feathers
impilo -- - tr. - prendre aux cheveux; maltraiter.
epileus -- a sort of hawk#
__san
diseased blood, bloody matter, gore, sanies % to make sound, heal, cure, restore to health, to heal, correct, restore, repair, allay, quiet % to become sound, get well, heal
praesanesco -- to begin to heal prematurely, to close up too soon
praesano -- to heal up prematurely
consanesco -- to recover, be healed.
consano -- to make wholly sound, to heal, cure
persano -- to cure completely
subsanium -- c. subsannium.
insania -- unsoundness of mind, madness, frenzy, folly, senselessness, madly, madness, excess, extravagance, Poetic enthusiasm, inspiration
insanio -- to be of unsound mind, be senseless, be without reason, be mad, rave, with method, To be violent, be absurd, be extravagant, be wild, fashionably
exsanio -- to free from matter, corruption, to cause to suppurate, to cleanse, dress
resanesco -- to grow sound again, heal again
resano -- to make sound again, to heal again
__sic
a curved dagger, poniard
praesica -- mot forgé pour expliquer brassica#
praesiciae -- v. prosiciae
dissico -- to cut apart; to cut in pieces; to dismember, dissect;
dissicio -- to throw asunder; to drive asunder; to scatter, disperse
prosiciae -- c. prosecta
prosicies -- the flesh cut off for sacrifice
prosico -- - tr. - 1 - couper, amputer. - 2 - découper (les entrailles d'une victime). - 3 - sacrifier, offrir en sacrifice. - 4 - fendre (la terre), labourer.
prosicium -- c. prosecta.
insicia -- viande hachée, chair à saucisses.*
insicium -- stuffing, force-meat, a dish of minced meat*
__sip=sup
to throw, throw about, scatter
praesipio -- to feel beforehand, have a presentiment of
dissipo -- to spread abroad, scatter, disperse, To disperse, rout, scatter, put to flight, P. perf., disordered, scattered, To demolish, overthrow, destroy, squander, dissipate, to disperse, spread abroad, circulate, disseminate, scatter, To drive away
desipisco -- - intr. - extravaguer.*
insipo -- to throw in
insipio -- n'être pas dans son bon sens  pour insipo : tr., jeter sur ou dans
obsipo -- to sprinkle at, upon
__sip=sap
consipio -- to be sane, be of sound mind
subsipio -- - intr. - Varr. avoir un peu de saveur.
desipio -- to be void of understanding, be silly, act foolishly, to trifle
resipio -- to have a flavor of, smack of
resipisco -- to recover the senses, come to, revive, recover, have come to your senses
__sud
to sweat, perspire, are drenched, exude, exude, To be exuded, drop, drip, distil, to toil, labor hard, exert oneself % Somewhat moist % in Schweiß geraten
praesudo -- to sweat before
consudasco -- to sweat much;
consudesco -- to sweat much;
consudo -- to sweat much, profusely
subsudo -- int., transpirer un peu
desudasco -- to sweat away; to perspire freely/greatly;
desudesco -- int.  suinter [en parl. des murs]
desudo -- to sweat, make great exertion
adsudasco -- - intr. - se mettre en sueur.
adsudesco -- to begin to sweat
adsudo -- - intr. - entrer en sueur.
exsudo -- to ooze, exude
insudo -- to sweat on, stain with sweat
resudo -- to sweat, exude (of the ground)
esudo -- 
__sul
praesulor -- to be a superintendent
consulo -- to meet and consider, reflect, deliberate, take counsel, consult, take care, have regard, look out, be mindful, to take thought for the future, for the common good, ne, To take a resolution, resolve, conclude, determine, To consult, inquire of, ask for advice, counsel with, apply to, question, asked, ask your opinion of it. &mdash; Supin. acc., To consult, To take counsel, ask advice, skilled in the law, To refer to, consult, To deliberate upon, consider, To advise, counsel, recommend, To resolve upon, determine, decide, commit suicide, to regard favorably, take in good part
consuleo -- Fort. c. consulo.
assula -- splinter, chip of wood/stone;#
exsulo -- to be an exile, be banished, live in exile, To be absent, be a stranger
exsulor -- v. exsulo
ansula -- a little handle, A small ring, hook, A small loop at the edge of sandals for the ties#
__tep
to be moderately warm, be lukewarm, be tepid, to be warm, glow with love, be enamoured, To be lukewarm, be without ardor, be indifferent % to become warm, grow lukewarm, be warmed
praetepesco -- to grow warm before
praetepeo -- to glow before
detepesco -- to cease to be lukewarm, to grow cool
intepeo -- to be lukewarm
intepesco -- to become lukewarm, be warmed
__uiti
life, have nearly fooled away, A life, way of life, way of living, manners, good manners, from real life, life, dearest, A life, course of life, career, biography, An existence, being, spirit, They who live, people, the world % a fault, defect, blemish, imperfection, vice, have been damaged, A defect in the auspices, unfavorable sign, impediment, base metal, alloy, a fault, defect, blemish, my greatest fault, the unfavorable situation, the injurious effects, A moral fault, failing, error, offence, crime, vice, blame him. &mdash;A crime against female chastity, violation % to shun, seek to escape, avoid, evade, to shun, avoid, to shun oneself % to make faulty, injure, spoil, mar, taint, corrupt, infect, vitiate, defile, to violate, to corrupt, falsify, nullify, void, falsified, by declaring void the appointment of a day % jantes d'une roue.
praeuitio -- to corrupt beforehand
conuitio -- to attack, injure at the same time
conuitium -- a loud noise, a cry, clamor, outcry*
conuitior -- to revile, reproach, taunt, rail at
4300
__uit
inuito -- to invite, treat, feast, entertain, for entertainment, To invite, summon, challenge, To ask, request, urge, to incite, allure, attract, encourage flattery, court, allure to transgression, arouse
deuito -- to avoid, shun
exuito -- c. evito
euito -- ncio
auitium -- the winged race#
__diu=diue
diuitiae -- riches, wealth, rivalries, am richer than Crassus. &mdash; Treasures, ornaments, richness, copiousness, affluence
diuitia -- Divitia (= Deutz).
diuito -- - tr. - enrichir.
__pren
prensito -- to take, catch hold of
__dens
densito -- fréq. de denso
__pren
prensorium -- a trap, mouse-trap
__sen
sensorium -- the seat, organ of sensation
__pres
pressorium -- a press
__sess=sede
sessorium -- a seat.
__amit
a father's sister
proamita -- f, a great-grandfather's sister
abamita -- sister of an abavus, or great - great - grandfather
adamita -- Isid. grand-tante (au quatrième degré).
__clin
- tr. - incliner, faire pencher.
proclino -- to bend forward, bend, incline
succlino -- to bend, incline somewhat
declino -- to bend aside, turn away, To deflect, turn away, To avoid, evade, shun, To lower, close, let sink, to turn aside, deviate, turn away, digress, decreases, To turn aside, cause to differ, differing, To turn off, ascribe, To turn from, avoid, shun
inclino -- to bend; to lower; to incline; to decay; to grow worse; to set (of the sun); to deject;
reclino -- to bend back, cause to lean, recline
acclino -- to cause to lean on, stay upon, se, inclined
exclino -- - tr. - incliner hors.
__dorm
prodormio -- to sleep before
redormio -- to sleep again
__duc
producto -- to throw before, interpose
producta -- preferable things
reducto -- to withdraw, draw back
__patr
a fatherland, native land, own country, native place, in exile, A dwelling-place, home, the home, the source % to bring to pass, execute, perform, achieve, accomplish, bring about, effect, finish, conclude % a father's brother, paternal uncle, A censor, reprover
propatruus -- a great-grandfather's brother
expatro -- (once), to finish, squander in voluptuousness
abpatruus -- a great-greatgrand-uncle, patruus maximus
adpatruus -- oncle au 4e degré.
repatrio -- to return to one's country, go home again
__prophet
propheta -- a foreteller, soothsayer, prophet
prophetia -- prediction, prophecy
propheto -- to foretell, predict, prophesy
__prostyp
prostypa -- moulures [t. d'archit.].
prostypum -- a pattern, model
__tric
protrico -- to make difficulties beforehand
extrico -- to disentangle, extricate, clear, free, procure with difficulty, to unravel, clear up
extricor -- c. extrico.
intrico -- to entangle, perplex, embarrass
retrices -- conduites d'eau d'irrigation
__trop#
the tropic solstice
protropum -- the first new wine that runs from the grapes before pressing
attropo -- tr., prendre dans le sens figuré
__anim
air, a current of air, breeze, breath, wind, the air, Breath, take breath, correct their breath, the fumes of wine, life, to give up the ghost, exert yourself in gesturing to the point of death, is in debt for his life?, for everything, A life, living being, soul, person, The shades, departed spirits, manes, The rational soul, mind % to enliven, quicken, animate / to dispose, inspirit, are inspirited % the rational soul, soul, life, the mental powers, intelligence, reason, intellect, mind, attention, whose discernment, the whole intelligence of the community, Of the memory, Consciousness, recollection, self-possession, the conscience, Opinion, judgment, notion, belief, in my judgment, to the best of your knowledge and belief. &mdash; The imagination, fancy, Feeling, sensibility, affection, inclination, passion, heart, the character, bad mind, bad heart, Disposition, inclination, well disposed, both gold and the disposition, to give it, a kindly disposition, from the heart, in earnest, deeply, sincerely, from impulse or with some design, adjj., pitying him in her heart, disposition, character, temper, wild nature, Courage, spirit, to be of good courage, courage enough, hope, the violence, give it quicker motion, Haughtiness, arrogance, pride, your pride is roused, bear the arrogance and pride, Passion, vehemence, wrath, an even mind, calmness, moderation, equanimity, with even mind, contentedly, resignedly, patiently, is content to believe, Inclination, pleasure, for the sake of amusement, for diversion, for pleasure, employ musicians.&mdash;Will, desire, purpose, design, intention, resolve, purpose, to intend, my plan is, it was my purpose % int., s'animer, s'irriter
redanimo -- to quicken again, restore to life, reanimate
exanimo -- to put out of breath, tire fatigue, weaken, exhaust, To breathe forth, To deprive of life, kill, wear out, to deprive of self-possession, terrify, agitate, stun, wear out, dishearten, out of his wits
exanima -- half dead with fear, terrified, dismayed
inanimo -- tr., animer
__rest
restiarius -- a ropemaker
__ost
ostiaria -- a female doorkeeper, portress
ostiarium -- a tax upon doors, door-tax
__sedul=sede
sedularia -- seats, cushions
aularius -- Gloss. courtisan.#
__segestr
segestra -- a covering, wrapper, Sing., Plur., a sort of mantle
segestre -- - 1 - natte (de paille). - 2 - couverture (en peau). - 3 - toile d'emballage. - 4 - manteau d'étoffe grossière.
segestria -- fourrure
__cup
semicupa -- une demi-tonne, un ventru.
semicupae -- a halftun;, pot-belly, fat-paunch
__un
to make one, to unite, adjunctam
subaduno -- to unite
coaduno -- to unite, add, join together, to collect into one
__alar
subalare -- an under-girdle
subalares -- the feathers under the wing
__haer
to hang, stick, cleave, cling, adhere, hold fast, be fixed, sit fast, remain close, holding, keep his seat, failed to break through, is at a loss, to hold fast, remain attached, be fixed, keep firm, adhere, inhere, hit the mark, fixed in my heart, be present, cleaves, incur, hung back, gaze upon, finds its place, To keep near, keep close, join, attach oneself, follow, pursue closely, To remain fixed, abide, continue, keep at, stick to, is fixed, adhere to his purpose, loiter, lasting, To stick fast, be brought to a stand, be embarrassed, be perplexed, be at a loss, hesitate, be suspended, be retarded, was retarded % to stick, adhere
subhaereo -- to stick under, behind; to cleave, adhere to
adhaereo -- to cleave, adhere, stick to:
adhaeresco -- to cleave, stick, adhere, was added on the verge of the tablet, to be pilloried as a fraudulent debtor, remained, to cling, adhere, to be devoted, never faltered. &mdash; To correspond to, accord with, fit, suit, To hang on, trail after, be the last, hung on the end, were chosen last
cohaereo -- to cling together, be united, cohere, To consist of, be composed of, to be consistent, agree together, will have no consistent meaning.&mdash;To hold together, remain, exist, maintain itself, To cling closely, adhere, be connected with, cleave to, be in contact with, to be closely connected with, be in harmony with, be consistent with
cohaeresco -- to hang together, cohere
inhaereo -- to stick fast, cling, cleave, adhere, inhere
inhaeresco -- to stick fast, cleave, adhere
obhaereo -- to stick fast to
obhaeresco -- to stick fast, remain stuck, to be stuck fast, to cleave, adhere to
__ring
to open the mouth wide, be vexed, chafe, snarl
subringor -- to make a wry face, be a little vexed
surringor -- to make a somewhat wry face, to be a little vexed
aringus -- hareng.#
__sann
a mimicking grimace, mocking face % - intr. - ricaner, se moquer. % int., ricaner, se moquer
subsannium -- intérieur d'un navire#
subsanno -- to insult by derisive gestures, to deride, mock, med.
desanno -- se moquer de
__tuss
to cough, have a cough
subtussio -- to cough slightly
extussio -- to cough up
etussio -- to cough up
__frag
a strawberry % strawberries % to become broken;, to be conquered, subdued % a fracture % v. suffrago
suffragor -- to vote for, support, favor, was supposed to have secured the votes for its owner.&mdash;To be favorable, favor, recommend, support
suffrago -- to favor, support, vote for
confraga -- a rough place, thicket, Comp., sup.#
refragor -- to oppose, resist, thwart, gainsay, hinder, withstand
__gill
suggillo -- - tr. - 1 - meurtrir, contusionner. - 2 - flétrir, insulter, outrager, vilipender (qqn, aliquem), railler. - 3 - Prud. suggérer, inspirer.
sugillo -- to bruise, beat black-and-blue, to jeer, taunt, insult, revile
__cre
to bring forth, produce, make, create, beget, give origin to, who are born to die, P. perf, sprung from, begotten by, born of, the son of, To make, choose, elect, presided at the election of, to produce, prepare, cause, occasion % ordure
supercresco -- - intr. - 1 - croître par-dessus, former une excroissance. - 2 - venir par surcroît, s'ajouter à. - 3 - tr. - dépasser, surpasser.
concresco -- to grow together, harden, condense, curdle, stiffen, congeal:
concreo -- - tr. - 1 - au passif être inné. - 2 - produire.
procreo -- to bring forth, beget, generate, procreate, produce
procresco -- - intr. - 1 - naître, provenir. - 2 - grandir, croître, s'accroître, se développer.
succresco -- to grow from below, grow up
discresco -- to grow broad, grow out
percresco -- to grow greatly
incresco -- to grow upon
recreo -- to make anew, renew, restore, revive, refresh, recruit, invigorate
recresco -- to grow again, increase again
adcresco -- to increase/swell, to grow larger/up/progressively; to be added/annexed to; to arise;
4400
ancrae -- vallon ou intervalle entre des arbres#
decresco -- to grow less, become fewer, decrease, diminish, wane, shrink
excresco -- to grow out, forth, to grow up, rise up
occresco -- - intr. - croître, grandir.
ocrea -- a greave, leggin (of metal, to protect the legs)#
__uiu
to live, be alive, have life, unless we live virtuously, for him alone, from hand to mouth, To survive, be still alive, as I live, may I die, if, as sure as I live, to owe life to favor, live at another's mercy, to conform to one's ways, live according to one's wishes, To live, support life, feed, be supported, sustain oneself, which were formerly my delight, are now my life.&mdash;To live, pass the time, reside, dwell, be, for its own sake.&mdash;To live well, live at ease, enjoy life, farewell, fare ye well, To live, last, endure, remain, be remembered % that which is alive
superuiuo -- to outlive, survive
suprauiuo -- - intr. - Spart. survivre.
conuiua -- a table companion, guest, promised guest
conuiuor -- to banquet, revel, carouse together
conuiuo -- āre = convivor.
peruiuo -- to live on, survive
prouiuo -- to live on
aduiuo -- To live with one;
reuiuo -- to live again
__prom
to take out, give out, bring forth, produce, come forth, to bring forth, produce, bring forward, express, let loose, To bring to light, exalt % a store-room
suppromus -- an under-butler*
depromo -- to draw out, draw forth, bring out, fetch
expromo -- to show forth, discover, exert, practise, exhibit, display
__cens
c. cena.
suscenseo -- to be angry, be indignant, be enraged, be provoked
__scens=scand
ascensus -- a climbing, ascent, a rising, to citizenship.&mdash;A way up, approach, ascent, winding
__scept
suscepto -- to undertake
susceptum -- an undertaking
__stru
abstruo -- cacher.
__antr
A stirring-spoon, skimmer, ladle % - tr. - P.-Fest. remuer (avec une cuiller).
transtrum -- a cross-beam, crossbank, bank for rowers, thwart#
contrio -- formé sur contrivi de contero), tr., broyer#
antrum -- a cave, cavern, grotto (poet.):
__atr=antr
atrium -- a room which contains the hearth, fore-court, hall, principal room, the main hall, An auction room, a dwelling, house
__intr
intro -- to go into, enter, to come between, To penetrate, pierce, enter, force a way in, to penetrate, pierce, enter, reach, attain, intrude, become your intimate friend
__extr
extro -- to go out from, to quit
__antr2
antruo -- to dance around
antroo -- tourner, danser comme les prêtres saliens
__amtr=antr2
amtruo -- to dance around
__sum
to be moist, be damp, be wet, P. praes., suffused, the cool night, n, beyond the swamps
transumo -- to take, to adopt, assume
absumo -- to take away, diminish, use up, consume, exhaust:
__post
postumo -- to come after, be inferior
postumum -- that which is last, the end, extremity
__allucin
allucinor -- to wander in mind, to talk idly, prate, dream, to follow no definite train of thought, to digress freely
__alucin=allucin
alucinor -- to wander in mind, talk unreasonably, ramble in thought:
__lucit#
allucita -- moucheron de nuit (qui va se brûler à la lumière).
alucita -- a gnat
__aphor#
tout petit poisson
anaphorus -- die Tragstange
diaphora -- distinction
__anthyll
anthyllium -- c. anthyllum
anthyllum -- espèce de plante
__colliph
colliphium -- a kind of nourishing food for athlet&oelig;
__coliphi=colliph
coliphia -- flesh-cakes (food for athletes), Iu.
coliphium -- a kind of nourishing food for athlet&oelig;
__fess=fit
confessa -- choses évidentes, incontestables
confessi -- criminals who have confessed their guilt
confessum -- an undoubted, certain, acknowledged thing, matter
__uorr
- tr. - 1 - balayer. 2 - emporter, enlever en balayant. 3 - fig. voler, faire main basse sur. 4 - poét. laisser traîner, traîner.
conuorro -- to sweep, brush together, to sweep, clear away
deuorro -- - tr. - 1 - enlever en balayant. 2 - fig. balayer [les mets], faire table nette.
reuorro -- to sweep back again, to scatter again
__fecti=fac
effectiua -- practical art, productive art
infectiua -- dye-stuffs, dyes#
__epiphan
epiphaniae -- c. epiphania 2
epiphania -- surface, superficie
__it
initiales -- 
initialia -- initiation aux mystères [de Cérès]
__nt#
intrantes -- To appear before
sentio -- to discern by sense, feel, hear, see, perceive, be sensible of, before they should be observed, To perceive, feel the effects of, feel, experience, suffer, undergo, endure, had been wasted by, to feel, perceive, discern, understand, observe, notice, became aware of their retreat, as far as I have observed, does not enter, to feel, experience, To think, deem, judge, imagine, suppose, be of opinion, believe, mean, most patriotic, in earnest, agree in opinion, acts on one side, while his convictions are with the other, and were fully convinced that, were aware, To give an opinion, vote, declare, decide
sentisco -- to perceive, note, observe
dentio -- teethe, cut teeth; (of teeth) grow longer (for lack of food to eat);
__aequ
to make equal, equalize, raise, returns equal love, extend, abolished, play all night, kept step to the song, equally vested in the two parties, raise, distribute equally, made on equal terms, To place on an equality with, compare, to make level, even, smooth, make as long as the enemy's, To become equal, equal, come up to, attain, reach, to reach, grow as high as the ridges, speak worthily of the achievements, lament adequately, rival by his spirit, keep pace with, as swift as the winds, as fine as mist, draw even with her mate % a plain, level:
praeaequo -- to make equal before
peraequo -- to make quite equal, filled up, yielded, produced
adaequo -- to make equal, equalize, level with:
coaequo -- to make equal, make even, level, to equalize, drag down
exaequo -- to make equal, place on a level, equal
inaequo -- to make even, level
__coc
t
praecocia -- over-hasty, premature, precocious, untimely
decoco -- - tr. - 1 - faire cuire, faire bouillir. - 2 - au fig. faire fermenter, mûrir, sécher. - 3 - réduire par la cuisson, faire évaporer. - 4 - au fig. réduire, affaiblir, diminuer, ruiner. - 5 - intr. - manger son bien, se ruiner, faire banqueroute. - 6 - décroître, se perdre, être ruiné. - 7 - couver, machiner.
__ror
to drop dew, scatter dew, besprinkled, To drop, trickle, drip, distil, shed moisture, with sprinkled waters
praeroro -- tr., arroser par-devant
arroro -- to moisten, bedew
irroro -- to wet, moisten with dew, to bedew.
__tum
to swell, be swollen, be tumid, puff out, be inflated, to swell, be swollen, be excited, be violent, rage, are in a ferment, To be puffed up, swell, to be pompous, be bombastic
praetumeo -- to be puffed up beforehand
contumesco -- to swell greatly
contumia -- abuse, insult, affront, reproach, invective, contumely, severe reproaches, violation
pertumesco -- to swell up greatly
detumesco -- to subside, become less swollen; to settle down (L+S); to cease swelling;
intumesco -- to swell up, rise
extumeo -- to swell up
extumesco -- - intr. - être enflé, s'enfler.
__gemm
a bud, eye, gem, A precious stone, jewel, gem, A wrought gem, a goblet carved of a precious stone, seal-ring, An eye % to begin to bud % to become a gem % to put forth buds, bud, gem
progemmo -- Augen - Knospen ansetzen, -bekommen
ingemmesco -- to become a jewel
__ric#
a small veil
sericula -- v. securicula.
oricula -- v. auric-.
__ment=mens
to invent, assert falsely, lie, cheat, deceive, pretend, pretend, to deceive, impose upon, To lie about, assert falsely, make a false promise about, feign, counterfeit, imitate, devise such a falsehood, assume falsely, fables, disappointed, to assume % the chin, beards % mint
submentum -- das Unterkinn
dementia -- insanity, madness, distraction, folly, so mad is he, follies
dementio -- to be out of one's senses, to be mad, to rave.
demento -- Act., to drive mad, to craze, deprive of mind, to bewitch, delude
ammentum -- courroie, bande de cuir, cordon de soulier, lanière, corde d'un arc.#
__men=man
obmento -- to wait
ommento -- to wait
__semen
semento -- to bear seed, to run to seed
sementum -- c. sementis
__menti
admentior -- erlügen
omentum -- fat, the intestines#
__cill#
mouvoir. % âne. % to move, put in motion
surcillus -- c. surculus
__ancill
ancilla -- a maid-servant, handmaid
ancillo -- - tr. - assujettir, asservir, dompter.
ancillor -- to serve as handmaid;, to serve, to attend upon, to be subservient to
4500
__occill=occis
occillo -- to break, smash
__tor=eo
a swelling, protuberance, fleshy part, muscle, brawn, a raised ornament, prominence, A stuffed bolster, cushion, couch, sofa, bed, bier, the bridal-bed, spouse, take the river-banks for beds % a round, swelling, bulging place, an elevation, protuberance, prominence;
praetoria -- a.-Vict. cohorte prétorienne.
praetorium -- the general's tent, the governor's residence, government house, a palace, palaces, the queen-bee's cell, A council of war, The imperial body-guard
__port
portorium -- a tax, toll, duty, impost, custom, tariff, a peddler's license-tax
__cotor
cotoria -- c. cotaria.
cotoriae -- a whetstonequarry
__sent=esse
absentia -- absence; absence form Rome/duty; non-appearance in court; lack;
absentium -- c. absinthium.
absento -- Act., to cause, to be absent, to send away
absentio -- int., être absent
__ment=mens
amentia -- want of reason, madness, senselessness, Folly
amentum -- a strap, thong:
amento -- n'avoir pas sa raison
ementior -- to speak falsely, lie, feign, fabricate, falsify, pretend
ementum -- Isid. idée, pensée.
__hort
to urge, press, incite, instigate, encourage, cheer, exhort % a garden, pleasure-garden, a park, in which Epicurus taught, A fruit-garden, kitchen-garden, Garden-stuff, vegetables % - 1 - = hortor, āri, verbe déponent. - 2 - au passif : être exhorté.
adhortor -- to encourage, exhort, stimulate, rouse, urge:
cohortor -- to animate, encourage, advise, incite, exhort, admonish, to exhort, encourage, address
cohorto -- to exhort, encourage
dehortor -- to advise to the contrary, dissuade
exhortor -- act., to exhort, encourage
inhortor -- to incite, instigate
__aestim
aestimo -- to determine the value of, estimate, value, rate, appraise:
aestimia -- Fest. estimation.
aestimium -- Fest. estimation.
__agnell
agnellus -- little lamb, lambkin;
agnella -- agnelle, toute jeune brebis.
__alimon
A plant, called also % the wild beet
alimonia -- food, nourishment; feeding, nurture, upbringing; cost of maintenance;
alimonium -- nourishment, sustenance, Ta.
__alter
altercor -- to alternate in discussion, dispute, wrangle, a match in debate
alterco -- to wrangle:
altercum -- henbane
__amic
amicitia -- friendship, A league, alliance, Friends, a circle of friends
amicities -- c. amicitia.
__phor
amphora -- a large oblong vessel for liquids, with a handle on each side, flask, jar, flagon, pitcher:
ephori -- les éphores (les premiers magistrats de Lacédémone).
ephorus -- a Spartan magistrate, one of the five Ephori
aphorus -- tout petit poisson
__chor#
a dance in a ring, dance to music, V., H., O., Tb., Pr. % a dance in a ring, choral dance, dance:, A troop of dancers, band of singers, chorus, choir: % a choree, trochee (a metrical foot, &macr; &breve;). % c. choreus : tribraque. % district.
anchora -- anchor; grappling iron/hook; [in/ad ~is => at anchor];#
dichoreus -- a double trochee
achora -- croûte sur la tête, teigne.#
__arbitr
arbitrium -- a judgment, decision of an arbitrator, Judgment, opinion, decision, pass judgment, Mastery, dominion, authority, power, will, free-will, choice, pleasure, all the witnesses you require, dictation, for his consideration, An appraisement, apportionment, monopoly, expenses
arbitror -- to testify on information and belief, depose to one's best knowledge, In your judgment, did, to be of an opinion, believe, consider, think, not merely, in my judgment, I think not
arbitra -- a female witness
arbitro -- to consider, believe, suppose:
__argent
argentum -- silver, wrought, wrought and coined, Silver plate, silver work, Coined silver, silver money, money
argenta -- 
__arm
armentum -- cattle for ploughing, neat cattle, horned cattle, oxen, a drove, herd, the monstrous sea-herd
armenta -- Cattle for ploughing;, a herd
__rmill#
armilla -- a bracelet, armlet, armsing
armillum -- wine jar; [ad ~ redire => fall back into bad habits, get up to old tricks];
__auct
auctoro -- to bind, oblige, hired as a gladiator, bound
auctoror -- To become security for, to give a pledge as bondsman, pass.
__spic=spec
auspicium -- divination by the flight of birds, augury from birds, auspices, authority to take the auspices, A sign, omen, divine premonition, indication by augury, under better omens, an impulse, command, guidance, authority, of Jupiter himself, Right, power, inclination, will
auspico -- to take auspices; to seek omens; to begin with auspices, make ceremonial start; to portend;
auspicor -- to take the auspices.
__autumn
autumno -- to bring autumnal conditions;
autumnus -- autumn, sickly, changeable
autumnum -- increase, autumnus, The season of abundance, the autumn.
autumnasco -- sich zum Herbste neigen
__auar
auaritia -- inordinate desire, greed, avarice, covetousness, gaping and eager, every kind of selfishness
auarities -- avarice
__coll
a mask % to bewitch, enchant, part. subst.
collare -- collar, neckband; chain for neck (L+S);
collarium -- a band, chain for the neck, a collar; abl., nom. plur.
ollarium -- the receptacle for the jars of ashes in tombs#
__lumn#
columna -- a column, pillar, post, destroy the city, fall into the hands of the jailers
alumna -- a foster-daughter, pupil
alumno -- to nourish, bring up, educate, dep.
alumnor -- nourrir.
__bur
to swarm % a species of animal
comburo -- to burn up, consume, to ruin
conburo -- to burn up, consume
__pau
to begin to fear, be alarmed
compauesco -- to become very afraid/full of fear/thoroughly terrified;
expauesco -- to be terrified, fear greatly, dread
__per=pari
a bag, wallet % inus., qui a donné peritus,
comperio -- to obtain knowledge of, find out, ascertain, learn, detected in
comperior -- to ascertain, learn, find out
cooperio -- to cover, cover over, overwhelm, bury, P. pass., buried, involved, covered
experior -- to try, prove, test, experience, endure, seek to win back, might have a full trial, may find, to have tried, have learned, have experienced, know by experience, To measure strength with, contend with, To try, undertake, attempt, make trial, undergo, experience, resort to everything before using, the last resort, find, submit to, To try by law, go to law, submit to trial
reperio -- to find again, find, meet with, find out, discover, grieved me less when lost than when found, to find, find out, discern, get, procure, obtain, save themselves, To find, discover, perceive, learn, ascertain, were found to be, To find out, hit upon, invent, devise, discover, devices for gain
imperium -- a command, order, direction, injunction, Command, authority, control, power, ascendency, sway, arbitrarily, give the order yourself, subject to, Supreme power, sovereignty, sway, dominion, empire, supremacy, authority, sole dominion, dominion, sovereignties, A public office, magistracy, term, Command-in-chief, supreme command, military authority, be under the same military head, A dominion, realm, empire, of the court, an authority, officer, general, military and civil authorities, rule, control, ambition
impero -- to command, order, enjoin, bid, give an order: Pa, Ch, for orders, to receive orders, To exercise authority, command, rule, control, govern, To be master, rule, control, govern, you are sovereign, make productive, is master or man, To give orders for, make requisition for, levy, require, impose, demand, prescribed
opperior -- to wait, attend, wait a whole hour, To wait for, await, expect, attend
__per
propero -- to make haste, hasten, be quick, be in haste, go quickly, in haste, to another subject, the running to and fro, To quicken, accelerate, prepare with haste, be sung briefly
__cel
kind of beer (made in Spain); % to hide from, keep ignorant of, conceal from, to be kept in ignorance of, to keep ignorant, elude, hide from, To conceal, hide, cover, keep secret, in the earth, no secret is to be made of it % the chisel, burin of the sculptor, engraver, a graver, Plur.
concelo -- to keep secret, conceal altogether; to conceal carefully (L+S);
occelo -- to conceal
__cla
a nail, reckon the beginning of the year, with a spike, to clinch, A rudder, helm, A purple stripe, a striped tunic % a knotty branch, rough stick, cudgel, club, A foil % - tr. - 1 - clouer, fixer avec des clous. - 2 - garnir de piquants.
conclaue -- a room, chamber, suite, apartment, dining-halls
conclauo -- to nail together*
__don
To give (alicui aliquod, or aliquem aliqua re => one something as a present); to present, bestow; to grant, vouchsafe, confer; to forgive; give (gifts), bestow; % a gift, present, bribes, darkness and the boon of night, A present to a deity, votive offering, sacrifice, of incense, obsequies
condono -- to give, present, deliver, surrender, abandon:
disdono -- tr., donner çà et là
__ect
conecto -- to bind together, connect, entwine, join, unite, link, to connect, to involve in, to connect, join, compose, to conclude, infer, every identical proposition
enecto -- tr., délier
__fit
confiteor -- to acknowledge, confess, own, avow, concede, allow, grant, in surrender, reveal, to reveal, manifest, show
profiteor -- to declare publicly, own freely, acknowledge, avow, confess openly, profess, avowing himself a candidate, accs., to avow oneself, profess to be, To follow as a pursuit, profess, To offer freely, propose voluntarily, promise, display, testify voluntarily, as volunteers, making great promises, come forward as candidates, To make a public statement of, report, return, state, registered as public women, classes himself
diffiteor -- to disavow, deny
infiteor -- Fest. nier, ne pas avouer.
infitiae -- denial, to deny
infitior -- not to confess, to contradict, deny, disown, to deny, repudiate
__iur
to swear, take an oath, without reservation, swear falsely, by Jupiter, in his stead, each soldier individually, in, to swear to observe, swear allegiance, vow obedience, adopt under oath, takes this form of oath, in this form of words, echo the sentiments, To swear by, attest, call to witness, the Styx, by which the gods swear, To swear to, attest by an oath, to the fact of sickness, swear to a debt, person. obj., to swear, bind by an oath, cause to swear, pass, To conspire, to swear that an accusation is not malicious % see iuro and iuratus
coniuro -- to swear together, swear in a body (of a levy en masse):
periuro -- ied
periurium -- a false oath, perjury.
abiuro -- to deny on oath, abjure:
adiuro -- to swear to in addition, attest besides, add to an oath:
4600
eiuro -- to abjure; resign; reject on oath (of a judge); to forswear, disown;
iniuria -- an injustice, wrong, outrage, injury, insult, harsh treatment, protect from outrage on the side of, his wrongs, threatened by, as its punishment, the insult of a dinner, to Rome, unlawful violence, assault, trespass, an insult, affront, abuse, per, unjustly, outrageously, unjustly, undeservedly, causelessly, wrongfully, An unjust acquisition, A damage, harm, injury
iniurio -- c. injurior.
iniurior -- to do an injury, to injure, Impers., Pass. part.#
iniuro -- not to swear
deiurium -- an oath
deiuro -- to take an oath, to swear
obiuro -- to bind by an oath
__sau
hurt % a love kiss, kiss, kiss for me, my love % embrasser, baiser.
consauio -- to cover with kisses; to kiss affectionately (L+S);
consauior -- - tr. - baiser tendrement, donner un baiser (à qqn, aliquem).
dissauio -- tr., baiser tendrement
dissauior -- to kiss ardently
__sene
to grow old, become aged, grow hoary, To decay, lose strength, grow weak, be enfeebled, waste away, decline, pine away, To waste, wane, decline, fall off, be diminished, be impaired, waning, is worn out, closing % old age, senility, decline, Waste, decay, by its own waste and decay.&mdash; Vexation, grief, trouble, affliction, Gloom, moroseness, An old man, masc % to be old % c. senex.
consenesco -- to grow old together, grow old, become gray
persenesco -- to grow old
assenesco -- to become old to
desenesco -- to diminish by age, to die away
insenesco -- to grow old in, spend a life upon
asena -- comme arena#
__sequ
to follow, come after, follow after, attend, accompany, to march, cannot be drawn out, which you fortunately have worn, To follow, succeed, come after, come next, and so forth, To go to, seek, be bound for, have for a destination, To follow, chase, pursue, To follow, fall to the share of, belong to, to follow, succeed, result, ensue, take the rank of, to befall, ensue, To follow, take as guide, comply with, accede to, obey, imitate, adopt, conform to, have imitated, shall be influenced by, obey the will, To follow, pursue, strive after, aim at, seek, to follow, be proved, To follow naturally, come easily, be readily controlled, be obtained without effort % to follow, to come, go after, to follow after, attend.
consequor -- to follow, follow up, press upon, go after, attend, accompany, pursue
persequor -- to follow perseveringly, follow after, follow up, pursue
prosequor -- to follow, accompany, attend, follow after, escort
subsequor -- to follow after, follow up, succeed, ensue
insequor -- to follow, follow after, come next
insequo -- dire, raconter; chanter.
obsequor -- to comply, yield, gratify, humor, submit, be accommodating
adsequor -- to follow up, overtake, come up with:
exsequor -- to follow to the grave
resequor -- to follow, answer, reply
__soc
to join together, combine, unite, associate, hold in common, share, to risk life for me, to be accompanied&lt;*&gt;, jointtask, to take part in % a sharer, partner, companion, associate, sister and wife
consocio -- to make common, share, associate, join, unite, connect
consocia -- a female companion, consort
dissocio -- to put out of union, disjoin, disunite
adsocio -- to join to, unite with
resocio -- - tr. - Auct. Hypogn. associer de nouveau.
__sop
to deprive of sense, make unconscious, stun, put to sleep, lull, of deep sleep, To make unconscious, stun, stupefy, to lull, lay at rest, calm, settle, still, quiet, render inactive, lulled to sleep % - intr. - s'assoupir.
consopio -- to lull to sleep, stupefy
obsopesco -- to fall asleep
obsopio -- to put, lull to sleep
resopio -- to put to sleep
__tab
to dwindle, waste away, melt, decay, to pine, languish, decline, waste, languished for love, through inactivity, for love of him, wastes with envy, to waste away, be wasted % corrupt moisture, matter, corruption, putrid gore, An infectious disease, plague, pestilence % to melt away, waste, consume, dripping % sang corrompu
contabesco -- to waste away
cottabus -- a clap, stroke#
distabesco -- to consume, melt away
pertabesco -- to be gradually consumed, to waste away
extabesco -- to pass away completely, disappear
detabesco -- int., s'évanouir, disparaître
intabesco -- to waste away, pine away
__tic=tac
conticeo -- to be silent; to keep quiet/still;
conticesco -- to become still, cease speaking, fall silent, To keep silence, To be silenced, cease, be hushed, to become still, cease, stop, abate
conticisco -- to become still, to cease speaking, sounding
conticium -- the first part of the night, the evening*
conticuum -- v. conticinium.
porticus -- a covered walk between columns, colonnade, piazza, arcade, gallery, porch, portico, a shed, gallery, The Porch, Stoa, school of the Stoics, the Stoic philosophy#
pertica -- a pole, long staff#
reticeo -- to be silent, keep silence, make no answer, to keep silent, keep secret, conceal
reticesco -- c. reticeo
obticeo -- to be silent
obticesco -- to be struck silent, to be silent
__uiu
to become alive, get life, spring forth. % to become alive, get life, spring forth.
conuiuium -- a meal in company, social feast, entertainment, banquet, for company, Guests at table
reuiuesco -- to come to life again, to be restored to life, to revive
reuiuisco -- to come to life again, be restored to life, live again, revive, to revive, recover, gather strength, renew vigor
__corall
an instrument for scraping off the earth from the ploughshare
corallium -- corail.
corallum -- coral, red coral
corallius -- masc.#
__corusc
butcher's broom % fragon épineux [arbrisseau] % to clear of butcher's-broom
corusco -- to move quickly, vibrate, shake, brandish, weave, tremble, toss, brandishes at, To be in quick motion, flit, flutter, shake, trembles, To flash, glitter, gleam, coruscate
coruscum -- 
eruscus -- ronce.#
__tan#
cottana -- ver
setania -- Plin. sorte de nèfle.
setanium -- The name of a kind of medlar, neutr. subst.
__dign
to deem worthy % to deem worthy, honor, deign, condescend, requires for a knight, shall I stoop, accepts, disdained
dedignor -- to reject as unworthy, disdain, scorn, refuse
dedigno -- Drac. c. dedignor.
indignor -- to deem unworthy, be indignant, despise, resent, be offended, disdaining to bear, is not fit
__fens=fend
defenso -- to defend diligently, protect, the guards
defensa -- defence
offensa -- disfavor, displeasure, offence, hatred, enmity, out of hatred for me, A violation of law, offence, crime, An injury, affront
offenso -- to strike, dash against, against the wall
offensum -- the offence
infenso -- to treat in a hostile manner, ravage, To be hostile
__frit=frut
v. fruticesco
defritum -- must boiled down
__frut
defruto -- to boil down into
__lass
to make faint, tire, weary, fatigue, exhaust, fatigue myself % to become tired, to grow weary
delasso -- to wear out, tire
elassesco -- to become exhausted, faint, weary.
__linq
to go away, leave, quit, forsake, depart from, try everything, strength forsook him, swoon away, died, abandon, not to keep, to leave, give up, resign, abandon, relinquish
delinquo -- to fail, be wanting, fall short, trespass, err, commit a fault, do wrong, transgress, offend
relinquo -- to leave behind, not take along, not stay with, leave, move away from, quit, abandon
__turp
to make unsightly, soil, defile, pollute, disfigure, deform, be polluted
deturpo -- to disfigure, ruin appearance of; to discredit; to disparage; to defile;
exturpo -- - tr. - déshonorer.
__dic
dictito -- to say often, declare, maintain, assert, insist, To plead frequently, To allege, pretend, offer as a pretext
__coc
coctito -- faire cuire à plusieurs reprises.
__ac=ag
actito -- to conduct often, be engaged in, act in
__fam
a report, rumor, saying, talk, tradition, to hear of, a twofold tradition, a vague rumor, Rumor, Public opinion, the popular voice, fame, repute, reputation, infamy, favor, Fair fame, reputation, renown, fame, good repute, glory, Ill-fame, blame, reproach, scandal, the disgrace of remaining unavenged % int., avoir faim
diffamo -- to make a scandal of, divulge, To malign
diffamia -- defamation
infamia -- ill fame, ill report, bad repute, dishonor, disgrace, infamy, calumny, repair, A reproach, disgrace, reproach
infamium -- c. infamia
infamo -- to bring into ill repute, disgrace, dishonor, defame, branded, of making notorious
__larg
to give bountifully, lavish, bestow, dispense, distribute, impart, be generous with your own, To give largesses, bribe, to grant, concede, yield % v. largior
dilargior -- to give liberally, lavish
delargior -- tr., donner avec profusion
illargio -- to give to, bestow upon
elargior -- to give out, distribute, bestow
__amin
examino -- to weigh, to weigh, ponder, consider, examine, try, test
examina -- c. examen,
__empl
exemplum -- a sample, specimen, representatives of the race, An imitation, image, portrait, draught, transcript, copy, A pattern, model, original, example, precedent, incident, case, a draft, room to show themselves, as an example, by becoming a precedent, by that instance, served as a lesson, for example's sake, A warning example, warning, lesson, penalty, to serve as a warning, A way, manner, kind, nature, after the manner of, A tenor, purport, contents, as follows
exemplo -- to adduce as an example
4700
__oner
to load, burden, fill, freight, expedition in loading, is burdened, gorge oneself, cover, arm, stone, To heap up, stow away, store, to load, burden, weigh down, tire out, oppress, overwhelm, overload, makes odious, To aggravate, increase
exonero -- to free, disburden, unload, empty
coonero -- - tr. - charger (de plusieurs objets à la fois).
deonero -- to unload, disburden
__imag
to move heaven and earth, to do one's best by hook or crook; % the opening in the upper part of a balance, in which the tongue moves
imaginor -- to picture to oneself, fancy
imagino -- to give an image of, to represent, fashion
__culp
a fault, error, blame, guilt, failure, defect, to blame, share, you are not without fault, temptation, Unchastity, Remissness, neglect, The mischievous thing, mischief % to reproach, blame, censure, reprove, disapprove, condemn, To throw blame upon, find fault with, complain of
inculpo -- - tr - inculper.
deculpo -- tr., blâmer
__fant
infantia -- inability to speak, want of eloquence, Childhood, Second childhood, childishness
infanto -- to nourish, feed as an infant
__grau
to become burdened, grow heavy, to grow worse
ingrauesco -- to grow burdensome, be wearied, To increase, be aggravated, grow worse, becomes oppressive, to grow dearer, To grow in importance, becomes more engrossing
adgrauasco -- - intr. - 1 - s'alourdir. - 2 - s'aggraver, empirer [maladie].
adgrauesco -- to become heavy.
__obscur
obscuro -- to render dark, darken, obscure, eclipsed.&mdash;To hide, conceal, cover, shroud, darken, veil, kept out of sight, to obscure, render indistinct, express indistinctly, To render unknown, bury in oblivion, To suppress, hide, conceal, To cause to be forgotten, render insignificant, obsolete
obscurum -- -I. dim light, twilight, the dark, darkness, obscurity -II. darkling, unseen
__gann
to bark, snarl, growl
oggannio -- to yelp; to snarl, growl;
obgannio -- to snarl at
__opitul
opitulor -- to bring aid, help, aid, assist, succor, relieve
opitulo -- c. opitulor.
opitulus -- a helper, aider, succorer
__agr
tr., c. peragro, parcourir
peragro -- to wander through, travel, pass through, traverse, to go through, traverse, spread, search, penetrate
peragror -- 
__angul
pergula -- a school, lecture-room, the whole school, A brothel#
angulus -- an angle, corner, at right angles, the farthest corner, a secret place, nook, corner, lurking-place, petty discussions
angulo -- to make angular, cornered
__reg
regulus -- a ruler of a small country, petty king, prince, chieftain, lord, A king's son, prince, member of a royal family
regulo -- to direct, regulate
regulor -- tr., former selon la règle
degulo -- to devour, consume#
__mit
to be softened, To grow mild, become gentle, be tamed, are tamed, to grow mild, become gentle, be civilized, be moved by % tr., adoucir % to become mild, mellow, to grow ripe
pernicies -- destruction, death, ruin, overthrow, disaster, calamity, mischief, A pest, bane, curse, Verres#
immitesco -- - intr. - entrer en fureur.
immitia -- barbarous acts
semita -- a narrow way, side-way, path, foot-path, lane, by-way#
semito -- Plin. diviser par des sentiers.#
__ul#
swamp-grass, sedge
postulo -- to ask, demand, claim, require, request, desire, expect, undertake to deceive him, asked an audience, were claimed, expects, of the praetor, To summon, arraign before a court, prosecute, accuse, impeach, ask leave to prosecute, ask that the slaves be examined under torture, the appointment of a special tribunal, to demand, ask, to make necessary, require, demand, call for
ambulo -- to walk, walk about, take a walk, To go, travel, march, To traverse, go to law, to march around, strut about
perula -- purse;
comula -- pretty hair
__adul
adulo -- to fawn upon:
adulor -- to fawn:
__anul=annul
anulus -- a ring, finger-ring, seal-ring, signet-ring
amulum -- starch#
amula -- bassin [vase]#
inula -- elecampane#
inuleus -- faon.#
__dur
reduresco -- to grow hard again
__ur
to burn, To burn up, destroy by fire, waste by burning, reduce to ashes, consume, To burn, scorch, parch, dry up, sting, pain, to burn in, to paint encaustically, To rub sore, gall, fret, chafe, corrode, To pinch with cold, nip, blast, wither, frostbite, to burn, inflame, consume, fire, heat, set on fire, kindle, excites envy, To vex, annoy, gall, disturb, harass, oppress % a kind of earth in mines % a Hercynian wild ox, ureox, urus % to plough round, mark out with a plough % the curved part of a plough, the plough-tail;
praeuro -- to scorch at the extremity or on the surface;
amburo -- to burn round, scorch, singe, consume, singed, on a funeral pile of his own books, still burning, to injure by cold, benumb, P. pass., singed, injured, damaged
peruro -- to burn up, waste by fire
suburo -- to burn slightly, to singe, scorch
aduro -- to set on fire, kindle, scorch, parch, burn, singe:
deuro -- to burn up, consume, destroy
exuro -- to burn out, burn up, consume
inuro -- to burn in, burn
oburuo -- c. urvo
aura -- the air (in motion), a breeze, breath of air, wind, blast:#
eurus -- the southeast wind, The east wind#
eurae -- extrémités de l'essieu#
__aur
aurum -- gold, more precious than, The color of gold, golden lustre, brightness, The Golden Age, An ornament, implement, vessel of gold, a golden goblet, golden jewellery, necklace, a light ring for summer, a golden bit, the golden fleece, Coined gold, money, A gilded yoke
auresco -- to become of the color of gold
auro -- to overlay with gold, to gild, finite verb
aurea -- the bridle of a horse
__cer#
wax, the wax cells, A writing-tablet, leaf of wood covered with wax, the first leaf, A seal, A waxen image, wax figure, family portrait % a hind, a deer % a stag, deer, a structure of sharp stakes, chevaux-de-frise % a Spanish drink, prepared from corn % a Spanish drink, prepared from corn % a bad species of swelling, ulcer % to cover, overlay, smear with wax, to wax, part. pass. % to bring forth, produce, make, create, beget
proceres -- chiefs, princes; leading men of the country/society/profession
incero -- to cover with wax
__acer
aceruus -- a mass of similar objects, pile, heap:
aceruo -- to heap up, pile up, to multiply
__duc
produco -- to lead forth, lead forward, bring out
reduco -- to lead back, bring back, conduct back, escort back, accompany
seduco -- to lead aside, take apart, draw aside, lead away, carry off, set aside, put by
auca -- [en part.] oie#
auceo -- to observe attentively#
__lub
prolubium -- desire, inclination, fancy
collubet -- it pleases, it is agreeable, act., pass.
collubus -- the exchange of coins of different kinds, of different countries, agio.
conlubeo -- - intr. avec dat. - être du goût de, plaire à.
allubesco -- - intr. - 1 - complaire à qqn [alicui]. - 2 - commencer à avoir du goût pour qqch [alicui rei].
__prooem
prooemium -- an introduction, preface, proem
prooemior -- to make an introduction, preface
__pin#
a pine, pine-tree, fir, firtree, to Cybele, A ship, vessel, boat of pine, A pine torch, A wreath of pine-leaves, A pine forest % the sea-pen, spiny mussel % a pine-nut, a pine-cone % a pine-cone; plur.
propino -- to drink to one's health, pledge
propina -- a cook-shop
supino -- to bend backwards, lay back, throw over, turned up by the plough, turn up my nose
opinor -- to be of opinion, suppose, imagine, conjecture, deem, believe, think, judge, am sure of it
opino -- (anteclass.) v. opinor
apinae -- trifles, worthless things
apinor -- - intr. - faire le plaisant.
__pit
propitio -- to appease, propitiate
compitum -- a crossing of roads, place where roads cross, a cross-way, cross-roads, corner
compitus -- a place where several ways meet, a cross - way, cross - road
__proxim
proximum -- the neighborhood, vicinity
proximi -- one's neighbor, fellow-man
proximo -- to come, draw near, to approach, be near
__purpur
to purify % 
purpura -- purple color, purple; purple dye; purple-dyed cloth;
purpurasco -- to grow purple
purpuresco -- c. purpurasco
purpuro -- Act., to purple, to make purple-colored, to dye with purple, to darken
__pur
suppuro -- to gather matter, form pus, come to a head, suppurate#
impuro -- tr., rendre impur
__ret
retiarius -- a gladiator who used a net to entangle his adversary, net-fighter
cotiarius -- émouleur.#
__segn
segnitia -- sloth, sluggishness, inertia; weakness, feebleness; disinclination for action;
segnities -- slowness, tardiness, dilatoriness, sluggishness, inactivity
4800
__sentin
sentina -- bilge-water
sentino -- to bail, pump out the bilge-water from a ship
__seru
seruula -- young servant girl;
seruulus -- young slave;
seruulus -- young slave;
seruola -- a young female servant, handmaid
__lim
slime, mud, mire, clay, filth, pollution an apron crossed with purple % a kind of herb, with the poisonous juice of which the Gauls anointed their arrows used in hunting % a file, polishing, revision % to file, polish, finish, To investigate accurately, clear up, To file off, take away from, diminish, limited himself
sublimo -- to raise, place in elevated position; to soar; to send up (spirits) from underworld;
sublime -- Height, lofty, exalted, eminent, distinguished.
collimo -- tr.
perlimo -- to file;, to sharpen, make clearer, med.
delimo -- - tr. - ôter en limant; limer; traiter à fond (un sujet).
illimo -- souiller de limon
oblimo -- to cover with mud, deluge, besmear, To scatter, lavish, squander, dissipate
elimo -- to file off, polish, finish
olimo -- hell-, klar machen, reinigen
__orn
to fit out, furnish, provide, supply, equip, get ready, prepare % the wild mountain-ash
suborno -- to fit out, furnish, provide, supply, equip
perorno -- to adorn constantly
redorno -- to adorn again, to readorn
adorno -- to provide, furnish, fit out, equip, make ready:
exorno -- to fit out, equip, furnish, supply, provide
coorno -- - tr. - orner ensemble.
deorno -- - tr. - Gloss. déparer.
inorno -- to adorn
reorno -- tr., orner de nouveau
__ulc#
c. ulciscor
subulcus -- a swine-herd
disulco -- v. dissulco
disulca -- die gespaltene Klaue
__mulc
emulceo -- tr., adoucir
__dec
condeceo -- it is fitting/becoming/seemly/meet; (w/ACC + INF);
condecet -- it becomes, it is becoming, meet, seemly
indeceo -- to misbecome;, acc. pers.
indecet -- être inconvenant.
__pund#
dipundius -- two asses (weight/money); (two pounds); two feet (linear measure); need/want
__acanth
the iron ring around a carriage-wheel, the tire
acanthus -- The plant bear's-breech, bear's-foot
acantha -- acanthe (plante).
__ctuar#
actuarius -- A short-hand writer
actuaria -- a swift boat
actuarium -- a road, feet wide between fields, hunting-dogs, hounds
__mn#
A Greek weight of a hundred Attic drachmas, a mina
antemna -- a ship's yard
omne -- every thing
omnia -- all things
__mod#
a corn-measure, measure, peck, in full measure, with short measure, pecks, a peck of money % a measure, extent, quantity, girth, be the flank excessively long, A proper measure, due measure, moderation, immoderately, excessively, A measure, rhythm, melody, harmony, time, the music of the flute, time, moral harmonies, A measure, bound, limit, end, restriction, bounds, make an end.&mdash;A way, manner, mode, method, fashion, style, as an ambassador, way of life, by what means, well knowing how, if it is possible, like slaves, wonderfully, thus, after the manner of men, in such wise, by no means, in every way, urgently, every way, extravagantly, wondrously, very greatly, genit, eius or cuius, of that sort, of such a kind, such, of what sort, of what sort soever, such, of that kind % the Roman corn-measure, a measure, peck, to measure one's money by the peck, a peck
commodo -- to serve with, accommodate, grant, supply, lend, to furnish, to lend an ear to, their courtesy in lending, to grant, allow, To please, be kind, be obliging, serve, favor
commodum -- a convenient opportunity, favorable condition, convenience, when it shall be convenient for you, at our convenience, Advantage, profit, gain, the goods of life, interests, there is this satisfaction, to the advantage of, consistently with the interests of, A reward, pay, stipend, salary, wages for public service, emoluments, A loan
semodius -- a half-peck
__fan
a shrine, sanctuary, temple % to dedicate, consecrate % se démener en furieux.
profano -- to render unholy, desecrate, profane, violate
profanum -- Unlearned, ignorant, gen.
cofanus -- a pelican#
adfaniae -- sornettes, balivernes, caquets, babils, discours frivoles.#
__secund
secundo -- to favor, further, second, prosper, bring to a favorable issue
secundae -- the after-birth, secundines
__pron
to bend forward, to bow
adprono -- to lean forwards;
apronia -- the plant usually called#
__macul
a sting, a point, a sting, spur, goad % -I. a little needle -II. a little water, a small stream of water, acula;
abaculus -- a small cube or tile of colored glass for making ornamental pavements#
emaculo -- to clear from spots, to purify
__ling
a people in Celtic Gaul, Langres % the tongue, A tongue, utterance, speech, language, check, give attention, speak for pay, Tongue, speech, dialect, language, Greek and Latin, the voice, note, song, bark, A tongue of land, Tongue, garrulity, insolence, boasting, Fluency, eloquence, readiness of speech
ablingo -- - tr. - oindre, frotter.
delingo -- to lick, lick off, up
oblingo -- - tr. - Inscr. lécher autour.
elingo -- - tr. - Aug. lécher.
elinguo -- to deprive of the tongue
__omin
to forbode, prognosticate, augur, interpret, presage, predict, prophesy, may his evil wishes fall, had a presentiment, of evil omen % to forebode, prognosticate, to augur, presage, predict, prophesy
abomino -- pass., abominated, accursed
abominor -- orig. of bad omens, to deprecate, wish to nullify:
__achill
achilleum -- éponge très dense.
achillium -- v. achilleum.
achillea -- a plant, achilleos
__ampl
to widen, extend, increase, enlarge, amplify, to delay a judgment, adjourn, reserve a decision, to defer one's business, put off the case of % anse, poignée % to extend, enlarge;, to make glorious
adamplio -- to widen, to enlarge, to increase, augeamus
reamplio -- tr., augmenter [fig.], relever
__iant#
- tr. - 1 - manger pour son déjeuner. - 2 - déjeuner.
adiantum -- the plant maiden-hair, or
amiantus -- the amianth, a stone which may be separated into threads and spun, and is inconsumable by fire; asbestos, earth-flax
__nict
to blink; % to move the eyelids % a winking, blinking % schnuppern (schnoppern), schnüffeln
adnicto -- to wink with the eyes, to wink, blink to, at
annicto -- to wink with the eyes, to wink, blink to, at
__null
adnullo -- to annihilate, annul
annullo -- to annihilate, annul
__agon
agonizo -- - intr. - Vulg. combattre.
agonizor -- combattre
__alb
alburnum -- the soft, thin, white layer between the bark and wood of trees, sap-wood, alburnum
alburnus -- a white fish, the bleak, blay
__alcyon
alcyonia -- les jours des alcyons, les jours calmes (jours pendant lesquels les alcyons couvent).
alcyoneum -- 
__alliat
alliatum -- a kind of food composed of, seasoned with, garlic
__aliat=alliat
aliatum -- mets à l'ail.
__aluear
alueare -- A beehive
aluearium -- ruche d'abeilles
__alueol
alueolus -- a tray, trough, basin, An oil jar, A dice-board, The bed of a small river
alueolum -- table à jouer, v. alveolus
__amarac
a kind of white figtree, aratia.
amaracum -- marjoram
amaracus -- marjoram:
__amar
amaritia -- Gloss. amertume.
amarities -- bitterness:
__matur
amaturio -- verb. desid., to wish to love
ematuresco -- to ripen, to grow mild, be mitigated
ematuro -- to ripen completely, to bring to maturity
__porric
a veil to be thrown over the head
ambrices -- Fest. lattes d'une toiture.#
porricio -- to lay before, offer in sacrifice, between slaughter and offering, at the very last moment
porriciae -- the parts of the victim consecrated to the gods, sacrificial pieces, med.
sericum -- silk; silk garments/fabric; Chinese goods;#
serica -- #
ericius -- a beam set with spikes, chevaux-de-frise#
__ambuba
ambubaia -- a Syrian girl, fluteplayer and dancer
ambubaiae -- a class of Syrian girls in Rome, who supported themselves by their music and immorality
__urb
to plough round, mark out with a plough % the curved part of a plough, the plough-tail;
amburbium -- the expiatory procession round the city of Rome, at which sacrifices were offered
4900
suburbium -- a suburb
__amitin
amitinae -- cousins, cousins-german
amitini -- cousins germains et
__ampull
a young animal, foal, young, offspring, chicks.&mdash;A young fowl, chicken, the sacred fowls, chick, young kite % a dark - gray garment % to put forth, sprout out, germinate
ampulla -- a vessel for liquids, with two handles, a flask, bottle, jar, swelling words, bombast
ampullor -- to talk bombast
__pull
repullesco -- to bud, sprout forth again
depullo -- dépouiller de la robe noire [de deuil]
__angell
angellus -- a little angle, corner
__agellus=angell
agellus -- a small estate, little field
__anguin
anguinum -- a snake's egg
inguina -- the front part of the body between the hips.#
__anther#
anthera -- a medicine composed of flowers, med.
athera -- a medicine prepared from
__antisc
antiscia -- lieux à égale distance des quatre points cardinaux
antiscii -- people on the other side of the equator, whose shadows are cast in the opposite direction from ours
__pang
appango -- to fasten to
depango -- to drive down, drive in, fix into the ground
oppango -- to fasten, fix on, to affix
repango -- to set in, plant
__arbust
arbusto -- to plant with trees
arbustum -- a place where trees are planted, plantation, vineyard planted with trees, trees, shrubs
__arctur
arcturus -- the brightest star in Bo&ouml;tes, V.
arctura -- 
__arenar
arenaria -- carrière de sable, sablière.
arenarium -- carrière de sable, sablière.
__asarot
asarota -- ouvrages en mosaïque.
asarotum -- a floor laid in mosaic
__atroph
atrophia -- a wasting consumption, atrophy
atropha -- membres atrophiés
__tegr
attegro -- verser du vin (dans les sacrifices).
integrasco -- to begin anew, break out afresh
integro -- to make whole, set, To renew, begin again, to recreate, refresh
__agul
coagulo -- to cause a fluid to curdle, coagulate
coagulum -- an agent of coagulation, rennet, runnet, Curds
__arct
Big/Little Dipper/Bear, region of celestial pole; North lands/people/direction; % to draw, press close together, to compress, contract % espace étroit, lieu resserré.
coarcto -- to press together, compress, contract, confine
inarcto -- to circumscribe, limit
__laeu
to make smooth, to smooth, polish % the left hand, The left side, left, go to the left, on the left side, on the left, on the left
collaeuo -- to make entirely smooth, to smooth
allaeuo -- to make smooth, to smooth off, over
delaeuo -- to smooth off, make smooth
__lax
to extend, make wide, open, expand, To open, undo, unloose, release, To slacken, relax, unbend, to lighten, relieve, free, unbend, recreate, To relax, mitigate, moderate, weaken, interrupted, To lessen, abate, reduce
collaxo -- to make loose, porous
perlaxo -- to relax greatly
dilaxo -- to stretch apart
relaxo -- to stretch out, widen again, make wider
__lut
mud, mire, you are in the same difficulty, offscouring of the earth.&mdash;Loam, clay, potter's clay, of better material % to turn to mud, become muddy % n, yellow, the yolk of an egg % mud, mire %  % to pay
colluto -- - tr. - couvrir de boue, salir.
colutea -- a pod-like kind of fruit
deluto -- To daub, plaster with clay
dilutum -- a liquid in which something has been dissolved, a solution, slight, faint
aluta -- a soft leather prepared with alum:
alutiae -- nom de certaines mines d'or
elutia -- minerai lavé, lavures d'or.
__collyb
collybus -- exchange, agio.&mdash; The rate of exchange.
collybum -- c. collybus.
__collyr
a lute, lyre, a stringed instrument invented by Mercury and presented to Apollo
collyrium -- a liquid eye-salve. &mdash;Plur., H., Iu.
collyra -- a kind of pastry of a round, elongated form, maccaroni, vermicelli
olyra -- a kind of grain, called also, which greatly resembles spelt#
__bin
combino -- to unite, combine, part. perf.
conbino -- to unite, combine, part. perf.
__pac
to agree, contract, bargain, covenant, perf. part. pass. % to make peaceful, quiet, pacify, subdue, soothe, are subdued
compaco -- to bring to peace
perpaco -- to quiet completely, pacify thoroughly
opaco -- to make shady, shade
__pag
a district, canton, hundred, province, region, the country, a district, canton, Collect., the villagers, country people % to fasten, make fast, fix; to drive in, sink in
compagus -- one belonging to the nearest village
repages -- c. repagula
__plu
compluit -- il pleut.
depluit -- il pleut.
__cac
to go to stool.&mdash;Supin. acc., H.&mdash;With % a servant
concaco -- to defile with ordure, cover with filth:
procacia -- boldness, shamelessness, impudence
acacia -- The acacia-tree, the Egyptian pod-thorn#
__ier
coniero -- c. conjuro.
periero -- to swear falsely, to forswear, perjure one's self.
deiero -- to take an oath, swear
deieror -- jurer, faire serment; attester par serment.
eiero -- to refuse upon oath, reject by oath, abjure, make oath that the tribunal is prejudiced, make oath of insolvency. &mdash; To resign, abdicate, To renounce, abjure
__iub
to order, give an order, bid, tell, command % a mane, flowing hair on the neck, A crest, the helmet, A beard
coniubeo -- to command together with
adiubeo -- Plaut. c. jubeo.#
__sar#
consario -- to hoe, rake to pieces
ansarium -- droit d'entrepôt
__os
ossarium -- a receptacle for the bones of the dead, a bone-vault, charnel-house
asarum -- hazelwort, wild - spikenard#
__scre
crachat, pituite. % to hawk, hem
conscreor -- to clear the voice, hawk much
exscreo -- to hawk, cough up, to spit out by coughing.
__port
aloe-wood
contarii -- a kind of soldiers armed with pikes, pike-bearers#
portarius -- a door-keeper, porter
retiarius -- a gladiator who used a net to entangle his adversary, net-fighter#
__cot
cotaria -- carrière de pierres à aiguiser.
__tus
contusum -- to break, lessen, weaken, destroy, subdue, put down, baffle, check
intusium -- v. indusium
__tut
watchful, careful, cautious, prudent
contutus -- an attentive looking at, a view, sight, abl. sing.
contutor -- to place in safety*
obtutus -- a looking at, gazing upon, gaze, sing, contemplation
__uar
to diversify, variegate, change, metamorphosed, to cause to change, diversify, vary, make various, interchange, alternate, with varying success, amid the conflicting voices, report variously, there was a difference of opinion, To be diversified, be variegated, change, alter, waver, vary, be various, differ, if there were a difference of opinion % A wooden horse, trestle % to bend, curve
conuario -- Act., to variegate
obuaro -- to be opposed to; to cross, thwart
auarus -- eagerly desirous, grasping, ravenous, too ambitious, eager only for glory, zealous, Avaricious, covetous, penurious, a miser, covetous men#
__ou
ouarius -- an egg-keeper
ouarium -- v. ovum
__piol#
copiolae -- a small number of troops
sepiola -- a little cuttle-fish
__coqu
coquito -- - intr. - faire la cuisine, faire cuire à plusieurs reprises.
__equ
equito -- to ride, be a horseman, practise riding, range, man&oelig;uvred, to ride, career
5000
equitium -- a stud of horses
__coqu
coquulum -- c. cŏcŭlum.
coquula -- a female cook
__equ
equuleus -- little horse, colt; rack, instrument of torture;
equula -- A little mare, a filly
equulus -- a small young horse, a foal
__aqu
aquula -- a little water, small stream
__rbit#
corbita -- a ship of burden
arbutum -- the fruit of the arbu, tus, wild strawberry, The arbutus, strawberry-tree
orbita -- a track, rut, a beaten path, rut, bad example
__cornut#
cornuta -- bête à cornes.
cornuti -- désignation d'un groupe de soldats
cornutae -- a kind of sea-fish.
__corpor
corporasco -- to assume a body, become incarnate
corporo -- to make, fashion into a body, to furnish with a body.
corporesco -- c. corporasco.
corporor -- passif de corporo. - 1 - devenir corps. - 2 - perdre la vie, n'être plus qu'un cadavre.
__rix
a quarrel, brawl, dispute, contest, strife, contention, a battle % int., c. rixor % to quarrel, brawl, wrangle, dispute.
corrixor -- - intr. - entrer en conflit avec.
porrixo -- to stretch out strongly#
__rud
to roar, bellow, bray, roaring, creaking
corruda -- wild asparagus#
erudio -- to educate, instruct, teach, polish, keep me informed, To teach, communicate, instruct in
__corymb
corymbus -- a cluster of ivyberries, cluster, garland
corymbia -- a species of the plant ferula
__stul#
costula -- petite côte
astula -- A splinter, shaving, chip, a chip, shiver
astulus -- petite ruse
__faec
defaeco -- to cleanse from dregs; to refine, purify, defecate, clarify
infaeco -- to pollute
__grum
A surveyor's pole, measuring-rod % - tr. - arpenter. % a little heap, hillock
degrumo -- - tr. - aligner, tracer en ligne droite.
degrumor -- to level off, to straighten
__norm
a measure, standard, A rule, pattern, precept % to square, to set by the square
denormo -- to disfigure, make irregular
renormo -- tr., remettre dans des limites
__dent
dentale -- c. dentalia.
dentalia -- the share-beam#
__palm
the palm, flat hand % int., pousser [en parl. du palmier] % 1 - tr. - marquer de l'empreinte de la main. 2 - tr. - échalasser (la vigne). % the palm
depalmo -- to strike with the open hand, to box on the ear
expalmo -- to slap, box, strike
__pomp
a solemn procession, public procession, parade % to make, do, with pomp
depompo -- to dishonor
expompo -- an den Pranger stellen
__sacr
to set apart as sacred, consecrate, dedicate, devote, To devote, doom, declare accursed, condemn, To set apart, consecrate, devote, give, dedicate, devote, To render sacred, hallow, consecrate, declared inviolable, by laws whose violation is followed by a curse, a law under the protection of the gods, To hold sacred, worship as sacred, To render imperishable, immortalize % something consecrated, a holy thing, sacred vessel, sacred utensil, holy place, sanctuary, temple, sacred vessels, the Penates, A sacred act, religious rite, act of worship, sacrifice, religious service, according to the Grecian rites, sacred songs, festival, divine worship, religion, Private religious rites, gentile rites, family worship, marriage solemnities, A secret, mystery, poetic inspiration
desacro -- to consecrate, dedicate
resacro -- to release from a curse
__torn
to turn in a lathe, round off, badly turned % a turner's wheel, lathe.
detorno -- to turn off, to turn
extorno -- tr., faire tourner
__diacon
pierre à aiguiser. % pointed stones
diacona -- Fort. diaconesse.
diaconia -- Cass. le diaconat.
diaconium -- the office of deacon, deaconship
diaconus -- a servant, minister of the church, a deacon
__diacop
a soothing salve
diacopus -- an opening, sluice in a dam
diacopi -- Einschnitte, Durchbrüche
__crot#
dicrota -- c. dicrotum.
dicrotum -- a galley with two banks of oars
__dic
dicterium -- a witty saying, a bon-mot, Plur.
dicteria -- beißende, witzige Einfälle, Sarkasmen
__metr#
dimetria -- a poem consisting of iambic dimeters
semetra -- irregular, inharmonious
__cori
skin, hide, leather, habits stick closely % a raven, to be hanged, A grappling-iron % skin, hide, leather. % the pupil of the eye
discorio -- Gloss. ôter la peau.
ancora -- an anchor:#
/decoro -- to adorn, embellish, grace, beautify, decorate, arrayed in spoils, surrounds, to decorate, distinguish, honor
decorio -- to deprive of the skin, outer covering; to skin, to peel
/decorum -- seemliness, propriety
excorio -- to strip of its skin, covering, to skin, strip
__cor
decoro -- to adorn, embellish, grace, beautify, decorate, arrayed in spoils, surrounds, to decorate, distinguish, honor
decorio -- to deprive of the skin, outer covering; to skin, to peel#
decorum -- seemliness, propriety
__pal
a spade, The bezel % to wander up and down, wander, roam, saunter, be dispersed, straggle % chaff % a stake, prop, stay, pale. % to support with pales, stakes, props; to prop up -II. c. palor, v. n. : to wander up and down, to wander, wander about; to be dispersed, to straggle
dispalesco -- to spread about, be noised abroad
dispalo -- - tr. - séparer.#
dispalor -- to wander about, to straggle, stray#
propalo -- to make public, manifest, to divulge
depalo -- to disclose, reveal
apala -- soft, tender, only with ova#
opalus -- a precious stone, opal#
__rar
to grow thin, become rare, open, become fewer, dies away
disraro -- to thin out, to make thin
diraro -- to thin out, to make thin
orarium -- a napkin, handkerchief#
__sup#
to throw, throw about, scatter
dissupo -- R
prosupo -- étendre en ligne droite.
insupo -- v. insipo.
__uulg
diuulgo -- to spread among the people, to make common, publish, divulge
__mulg
emulgeo -- to drain out, exhaust
euulgo -- nce#
__fren
to furnish with a bridle, curb, bridle, To bridle, curb, restrain, check, to bridle, curb, check, restrain, govern % a bridle, curb, bit, take the bit in one's teeth, resist.&mdash;Plur., a bridle, curb, means of governing, restraint, check, limit, give the reins to, the helm % see frenum % a bridle, curb, bit % e
effreno -- to unbridle, let loose
infreno -- to put on a bridle, furnish with a bridle, bridle, harness, curb
refreno -- to bridle, check, curb
__em
empturio -- int., avoir envie d'acheter
obturo -- to stuff, stop up, close, refuse to listen#
__caen
to dine, eat dinner/supper; to have dinner with; to dine on, make a meal of; % dirt, filth, mud, mire: % the principal meal of the Romans in the early period, taken about midday, dinner, supper
encaenia -- a consecration, dedication festival
encaenio -- to consecrate
__ruill#
eruilla -- gesse (plante).
aruilla -- dim. de arvina, embonpoint
__eunuch
eunucho -- to make a eunuch of, to unman
eunuchus -- a eunuch.
__dors
the back (of a beast of burden) % the back
exdorsuo -- to take out the backbone, to bone
exdorso -- to take out the backbone, to bone
__herb
an herb, grass, green blades, herbage, turf, a poisonous plant, a blade, young shoots, gathered too soon, Weeds, useless plants % to grow into green stalks, blades % v. herbens. % ers, lentille bâtarde (une variété fourragère de lentille). % c. herbesco
exherbo -- to free from grass, woods
obherbesco -- - intr. - P. Fest. croître en herbe.
__ocul
an eye, prominent, were turned, his eye was on, regard with fixed attention, to fix, fly at, is in full view, cheat out of their eyes, in public, out of sight, in, presence, lost the sight of, becomes blind of one eye, A luminary, the sun, an eye, bud, bourgeon, inoculate, a principal ornament, Corinth and Carthage.&mdash;The eye of the soul, mind's eye, feast one's eyes, delight their eyes, he is afflicted, in view, are belo&lt;*&gt;ed by, values highly, held dear, contentedly, obvious, is in view, picture to yourselves, fix your thoughts on, lose sight of % To furnish with eyes, make to see
exoculo -- to deprive of the eyes, sight
inoculo -- to inoculate, to ingraft an eye, bud of one tree into another
__pisc
to fish
expiscor -- to fish out, search out, find out
apiscor -- to reach, attain to, get, gain
__succ
N % être humide.
exsucco -- to deprive of juice, extract the juice of
insucco -- - tr. - mouiller, plonger dans, faire tremper dans, immerger.
__surd
to become deaf % - tr. - Calp. assourdir.
exsurdo -- to deafen, dull, blunt
5100
obsurdesco -- to become deaf
__uber
to be fruitful, productive, to bear fruit
exubero -- to grow luxuriantly, be abundant, abound, overflow, revels
inubero -- déborder (sur, in + acc.).??
__ulul
to howl, yell, shriek, wail, lament loudly, resound, shrieked
exululo -- to howl, cry out, howl violently
aulula -- small pipkin/pot;#
__mass
mass, bulk; heavy weight, load, burden; lump; kneaded dough; % to chew
immasso -- tr., réduire en bouillie
omassum -- bullock's tripe??
__plag
man-stealing, kidnapping, the selling of freemen as slaves % to strike; to wound; % a blow, stroke, stripe, cut, thrust, wound, a flogging, shock, a blow, stroke, injury, calamity, disaster, misfortune, makes a deep impression % to steal, kidnap
implagium -- petit filet.
implago -- to bring into a net, to entangle, ensnare.
__curu
to be crooked, curved, to make a curve
incuruesco -- to begin to bend
incuruisco -- to bend down
__fern
inferna -- - 1 - les enfers. - 2 - les parties basses (du corps), le bas ventre.
inferni -- the shades below
infernum -- 
__fusc
to make swarthy, blacken
infusco -- to make dark, darken, obscure
offusco -- to darken, obscure;, to vilify, degrade
__imic
inimico -- to make hostile, set at variance
inimicor -- avoir de l'inimitié.
inimica -- 
__odor
to make fragrant, perfume % to smell at, smell out, scent, to aspire to, aim at, to be snuffing after.&mdash;To search out, trace out, investigate, To get a smattering of
inodoro -- to scent, cause to smell
inodoror -- to smell out, trace out
__turg
to swell out, be swollen, be tumid, Fig., of speech, to be inflated, be turgid, be bombastic
inturgesco -- to swell up
obturgesco -- to begin to swell, to swell up
__rauc
a species of worm that breeds in oak-roots % to grow hoarse, become hoarse % to be hoarse % - intr. - Gloss. ronfler. % - dép. intr. - Gloss. être enroué.
irraucesco -- to become hoarse
irrauceo -- - intr. - s'enrouer, être enroué, prendre une voix rauque.
__ruct
Gloss. oesophage. % to belch, eructate, to belch up % to belch forth, belch up % to belch forth % a belching, eructation, rising of the stomach
irructo -- to belch into
obructo -- entgegenrülpsen
eructo -- to belch forth, vomit, throw up
__oliu
oliueta -- the olive-harvest
oliuetum -- an olive-grove, olive-orchard
__ora
oratoria -- the oratorical art, oratory
oratorium -- a place of prayer, an oratory
__origan
origanum -- origan (plante).
origanus -- the plant wild-marjoram, origan
__oscill
HEET
oscillo -- to swing, swing one's self, Pass.
oscillor -- c. oscillo.
oscillum -- a little face, little mask#
__ostrac
ostraceum -- a mussel, also called
ostracium -- a mussel, also called
__ard
to be on fire, burn, blaze, be burned, to flash, sparkle, shine, to burn, glow, be inflamed, be afire, with zeal for racing, were full of fury, to desire ardently, to be afire with love, burn with love % to take fire, kindle, be inflamed, to gleam, light up, to be inflamed, take fire, grow furious, grows furious % a steep place, steep, difficulty
perardeo -- to burn violently
redardesco -- to blaze up anew
exardeo -- to burn
exardesco -- to blaze out, kindle, take fire
inardesco -- to kindle, take fire, burn, glow
obardesco -- to burn before, to blaze out
__arm
implements, outfit, instruments, tools, for making bread, the ship's tackle, Armor fitted to the body, defensive armor, on his shield, covered with his shield, implements of war, arms, weapons, under arms, means of protection, defence, weapons, covering, ways of attacking me, in war, foreign, battle, A side, party in war, Soldiers, troops, auxiliary troops % to furnish with weapons, arm, equip, to take arms, to furnish, fit out, equip, for war, to arm, equip, furnish, strengthen, help, proofs, with nonsense, To move to arms, excite, rouse, stir, moves you to kill % the shoulder, the side, the upper arm
perarmo -- to arm, equip well
redarmo -- tr., armer de nouveau
dearmo -- to disarm; to deprive of power; to blunt;
exarmo -- to disarm, deprive of weapons/arms; to weaken, deprive of military strength;
adarmo -- - tr. - facund. armer.
coarmius -- compagnon d'armes
coarmo -- to arm together
obarmo -- to arm
rearmo -- - tr. - armer de nouveau.
inarmo -- to arm
__emn
peremne -- the auspices taken by magistrates on crossing a river or a spring
peremnia -- auspices pris avant la traversée d'un fleuve.
__mac
leanness, thinness, meagreness, atrophy, privation of food, poverty % to be lean, meagre % to grow lean, thin, to become meagre % a plant, called by the Greeks, pimpernel % to make lean, thin, meagre, to reduce % to maul, beat, hack
permaceo -- to be very thin, very weak
commacesco -- to grow lean
__uer
to reverence, revere, respect, stand in awe, To fear, be afraid, dread, apprehend, shrink, something serious, hesitate, who did not shrink from, with the less anxiety for the ships, ne, lest, that, I suspect that, ne . . . non, negat, ut, ut, that not, To await with fear, fear, dread, am apprehensive what it may mean
peruereor -- craindre fort, craindre vivement, redouter.
subuereor -- to have a little anxiety, be somewhat apprehensive
reuereor -- to stand in awe of, regard, respect, honor, fear, be afraid of, reverence, revere
reuereo -- to stand in awe, fear of; to regard, respect, honor; to fear, be afraid of; to reverence, revere, Ap., Pe., Impers.
aduereor -- at vereor
__cul#
c. culeus. % see culleus % - tr. - faire mettre au cul (d'une femelle), élever pour la saillie, faire servir à la reproduction. % the fundament % frapper.
porculus -- a young swine, young pig, a porker, porkling
porcula -- a little sow
surculo -- To clear of shoots, sprouts, to prune, trim, surculate
surculus -- a tender young twig, branch, shoot, sprout, sprig, A scion, graft, sucker, slip, set
occulo -- to cover, cover over, To cover up, hide, conceal, are concealed
anculae -- Fest. déesses de second rang (au service des divinités du premier rang).
anculi -- Fest. divinités de second rang (au service de celles du premier rang).
anculo -- to serve with, to bring, as servant, to have the care of
anculus -- a man-servant
ancule -- gen. plur., the shield that was said to have fallen from heaven in the reign of Numa, and on the preservation of which the prosperity of Rome was declared to depend;, Adj.
suculus -- a little boar
aculeus -- a sting, a point, a sting, spur, goad
acula -- -I. a little needle -II. a little water, a small stream of water, acula;
eculeus -- a young horse, foal, colt, A small equestrian statue, A rack, torture-horse
eculus -- poulain.
oculus -- an eye, prominent, were turned, his eye was on, regard with fixed attention, to fix, fly at, is in full view, cheat out of their eyes, in public, out of sight, in, presence, lost the sight of, becomes blind of one eye, A luminary, the sun, an eye, bud, bourgeon, inoculate, a principal ornament, Corinth and Carthage.&mdash;The eye of the soul, mind's eye, feast one's eyes, delight their eyes, he is afflicted, in view, are belo&lt;*&gt;ed by, values highly, held dear, contentedly, obvious, is in view, picture to yourselves, fix your thoughts on, lose sight of
oculo -- To furnish with eyes, make to see
__cl#
to hear, be spoken of, be said % v. cluo 2. % to be named, called, reputed, esteemed % to hear one's self called in some way, to be named, called, spoken of, reputed, esteemed, famed in some way, pred. nom., of manner.
praeclueo -- to be very famous, renowned
praecluo -- c. praeclueo.
surclo -- - tr. - 1 - Col. enlever les rejetons, arracher les rejetons, élaguer, tailler. - 2 - (sous la forme sync. surclo) Apic. fixer sur une petite broche, embrocher (t. de cuisine).
surclus -- c. surculus.
concla -- c. conchula.
coclea -- a snail:
anclo -- to serve with, to bring, as servant, to have the care of
anclor -- - tr. - puiser.
seclum -- a race, breed, generation, Sing.
__gn#
praegno -- to be pregnant
digno -- to deem worthy
dignor -- to deem worthy, honor, deign, condescend, requires for a knight, shall I stoop, accepts, disdained
regno -- to have royal power, be king, rule, reign, ruled by, in which Saturn was king, have kings, To be lord, rule, reign, govern, be swpreme, To lord it, tyranniz&lt;*&gt; domineer, to rule, have the mastery, prevail, predominate
regnum -- kingly government, royal authority, kingship, royalty, Dominion, sovereignty, rule, authority, supreme power, the presidency of the revels, Despotism, tyranny, personal sovereignty, arbitrary rule, A kingdom, state governed by a king, rule, authority, power, influence, A territory, estate, possession, your own estate, fields, these realms
segnesco -- to become slow; to abate, decrease
agna -- a ewe lamb
agnus -- a lamb
agnua -- mesure de superficie [120 pieds carrés].
__cli
a declivity, slope, ascent, hill, eminence, up-hill, the foot-hills, descent, the higher road to the Capitol, part of, we are but beginning, A slope, pitch % a gently sloping height, a declivity, slope, an ascent, a hill, eminence, ascending road, the higher road ascending to the Capitol, a part of, absol., a great difficulty to be overcome, any thing sloping, a slope, unevenness % arch. pour clivus
procliuo -- - intr. - pencher.
5200
procliue -- a slope, descent, declivity
decliue -- a declivity
__fil
a daughter % a son, an unknown man, a child of fortune % a thread, string % - tr. - 1 - Arn. étirer en fil. - 2 - Fort. faire couler en fil. % c. filum.
profilius -- fils du fils, petit-fils
exfilo -- to deprive of threads, unravel#
__lix
a sutler, camp-follower % to boil, seethe
prolixo -- to lengthen, extend
elixo -- to boil thoroughly, seethe#
__nur
a daughter-in-law % a daughter-in-law
pronurus -- a grandson's wife
abnurus -- Gloss. femme de petit-fils.
__rit
a form of religious observance, religious usage, ceremony, rite, Habit, custom, usage, way, mode, manner, in the new style, sing, after the usage of, in the manner of, in the fashion of, like % tr., exciter (primitif de irrito)
prorito -- To provoke, cause, produce by irritation
irrito -- to excite; to exasperate, provoke, aggravate, annoy, irritate;
irritum -- 
__tel#
a web, The warp, A loom, a web, plan % a missile weapon, missile, dart, spear, shaft, javelin, An offensive weapon, sword, dagger, poniard, axe, to be armed, my sheathed sword, a horn, avoids the blows of the caestus, the thunderbolts, a weapon, shaft, dart
protelo -- to drive forth, drive away
protelum -- A row of oxen, harnessed together for draught, a team
sutela -- a cunning device, contrivance, an artifice, trick, wile
atelia -- das Freisein von Steuern - Abgaben
__git#
purgito -- to cleanse, purify, purge
cogito -- to consider thoroughly, ponder, weigh, reflect upon, think, to call to mind, To feel, be inclined, be disposed, are friendly to, hostile in disposition. &mdash; To have in mind, intend, meditate, design, plan, purpose, mean, their purposes, plotted for
digitus -- a finger, to touch gently, to touch lightly, to be exceedingly happy, skill in reckoning, by a snap of the finger, to point, bid at an auction, by signs, hold your tongue, not to move a finger.&mdash;A toe, A finger's breadth, inch, swerve a finger's breadth
agito -- to set in violent motion, drive onward, move, impel, urge, drive to pasture, rowed about, To hunt, chase, pursue, to drive, urge forward, press, support, insist on, keep pressing this one point, To attend, keep, celebrate, To observe, obey, carry out, exercise, to pass, spend, to live, abide, be, remain, To move to and fro, stir, agitate, shake, disturb, toss, brandish, fanned, wield, nod, tossed, tossing up spray, to stir, rouse, agitate, stimulate, excite, goad, animates, To vex, disquiet, disturb, distress, in times of disorder, was distracted by, to disturb the loyalty, To insult, scoff, rail at, deride, revile, neatly mocked. &mdash; To prosecute, occupy oneself with, engage in, keep going, stir, keep active, so conducted himself, represented, To pursue, consider, deliberate on, meditate, To discuss, debate, sift, investi, gate, sifted, discussed, by the accounts, there were discussions
__hal
v. falae. % pêcheur [titre du 10° livre d'Apicius]. % - 1 - consoude officinale (plante). - 2 - espèce d'ail sauvage. % to breathe, emit vapor, be fragrant % cotonéa, grande consoude.
redhalo -- to breathe forth again, exhale
exhalo -- to breathe out, exhale, evaporate
adhalo -- to breathe on
inhalo -- to breathe upon
rehalo -- v. redhalo.
__ord
to begin a web, lay the warp, begin, commence, make a beginning, set about, undertake, thus began, describe, must begin with him % barley % Lucr. commencements.
redordior -- to take apart, unweave, unravel
exordior -- to begin a web, lay the warp, prepare to weave
exordium -- the warp of a web, a beginning, commencement, origin, An introduction, exordium, proem, preface
__fell#
to suck
refello -- to show to be false, disprove, rebut, confute, refute, repel, expose, without exposure
offella -- petit morceau
ofella -- a bite, bit, morsel
__lent
to proceed, slowly % to become viscous, grow sticky, soften, adhere, to slacken, relax % to make flexible, bend, to be plied
relentesco -- inch, to grow slack again, cool
elentesco -- to become clammy, soft#
olentia -- a smell, scent#
__pigr
to be slow, sluggish, reluctant % to become slow, sluggish % to be indolent, slow, dilatory % to be slow, be dilatory
repigro -- rendre indolent / ralentir, diminuer
epigrus -- cheville (en bois).#
epigri -- wooden pins, pegs#
__tiol#
retiolum -- a little net
otiolum -- a little leisure, my little bit of leisure
__riol#
seriola -- a small jar
ariolor -- to foretell, prophesy, divine.
ariolus -- 
__rrat#
serrata -- germandrée (plante).
serrati -- silver coins notched on the edge
__arr#
the money given to ratify a contract, earnest-money, purchase-money, a pledge, an earnest, arrha, pignus
subarro -- -tr. - Cass. engager par des arrhes, hypothéquer.
enarro -- to explain fully, recount, describe, interpret
__ass
to roast, bake, broil; to dry; % sudatorium (pl.), sweating-bath, sauna; % v. assus 1.
subasso -- to roast a little
coasso -- to join boards, planks together#
__oner
a sinew, tendon, muscle, A cord, string, wire, stringed instruments.&mdash;The leather covering of a shield, A bow-string, A wire, string, A prison, bring you into durance, The penis, a sinew, nerve, vigor, force, power, strength, intimately connected with, leaders, force, energy % the oleander, rosebay
onero -- to load, burden, fill, freight, expedition in loading, is burdened, gorge oneself, cover, arm, stone, To heap up, stow away, store, to load, burden, weigh down, tire out, oppress, overwhelm, overload, makes odious, To aggravate, increase
__neru=oner
subneruo -- to hamstring, hough
__rum
āre
subrumo -- to put to the udder, to let suck
surrumo -- to put to the udder, to let suck
adrumo -- to make a noise#
inrumo -- to give suck, abuse obscenely
__til#
the linden-tree, lime-tree % tablettes en tilleul / c. philyra
subtilio -- tr., amincir, affaiblir
subtilia -- fine goods, stuffs, Comp., Sup.
attilus -- a kind of large fish found in the Po, Ladano, Adello
__sucerd
sucerda -- the dung of swine
sucerdae -- der Schweinekot
__at#
tranato -- to swim across, pass beyond
conatus -- an attempt, effort, undertaking, enterprise, endeavor, Effort, exertion, struggle, endeavor, A beginning, undertaking, an impulse, inclination, tendency
conata -- an undertaking, attempt, venture, hazard, plan
conatum -- effort, entreprise.
peratus -- homme muni d'une besace [mot forgé]
amatus -- P. of amo.
reatus -- the condition of an accused person, a state of impeachment
__trapez
trapezia -- Boet. c. trapezium.
trapezium -- - 1 - trapèze. - 2 - Grom. borne (en forme de trapèze).
__ll#
antella -- 
prella -- celui qui comprime, comprimeur
sella -- a seat, settle, chair, stool, work-stool, teacher's chair, sedan-chair, on the front seat, A magistrate's seat, official chair
__pian#
appianum -- espèce de vert
apiana -- camomille.
__lis#
collisa -- meurtrissures
collisus -- part. passé de collido. - a - frappé contre, heurté, battu. - b - blessé. - c - devenu hostile.
illisus -- part. passé de illido.
__pad#
pitch-pines
coppadia -- dainty dishes, tidbits, delicacies
copadium -- hachis de viande
__gnor#
dignoro -- tr., marquer [un troupeau]
ignoro -- not to know, to be unacquainted, be ignorant, mistake, misunderstand, mistake me, your own faults, is unknown, art unrecognized, of want of skill, to be deceived by, fail to thrive when transplanted, well aware, To take no notice of, pay no attention to, ignore, disregard
__runc#
to weed out, root up; to weed, clear of weeds.
diruncio -- - tr. - Fest. sarcler.
aruncus -- the beard of the goat
erunco -- to weed out
__tit#
- intr. - gazouiller.
portito -- to bear, carry
emtito -- to be in the habit of purchasing, to purchase often
__com#
the hair of the head, hair: % to comb, arrange, braid, dress, To adorn, array, deck, wreathed
procomium -- toupet [de cheval]
incomium -- one of the ingredients of an ointment
encomium -- praise, eulogy
__aur
the air (in motion), a breeze, breath of air, wind, blast: % gold, more precious than, The color of gold, golden lustre, brightness, The Golden Age, An ornament, implement, vessel of gold, a golden goblet, golden jewellery, necklace, a light ring for summer, a golden bit, the golden fleece, Coined gold, money, A gilded yoke % to become of the color of gold % to overlay with gold, to gild, finite verb % the bridle of a horse
subauro -- leicht vergolden
deauro -- to gild, to gild over, no.
inaures -- ear-drops, ear-rings, ornaments for the ear#
inauro -- to overlay with gold
__aur2
inaurio -- to give hearing to, to cause to hear
__fuc
a drone % to color, paint, dye, paint made of crocodile's dung, use of cosmetics
suffuco -- etwas (ein wenig) schminken
offucia -- a paint, wash
__fuc2
offuco -- to strangle, choke, suffocate
__mir
to wonder, marvel, be astonished, be amazed, admire, to regard, esteem, is in love with % to wonder % a part, a degree
admiror -- to regard with wonder, admire:
demiror -- to wonder, be amazed
__nut
to nod, To sway to and fro, totter, stagger, to waver, falter, doubt, hesitate % a nodding, nod, A hint, intimation, A tendency, inclination, gravity, assent, compliance, Command, will, pleasure
adnuto -- to nod (to); to order/assent to by a nod; to bow to;
abnuto -- to forbid with emphasis, forbid approach to thee
annuto -- to nod often to, to nod to
5300
renuto -- to decline, refuse
renutus -- a denying, refusal;
__aed
- 1 - ordres. - 2 - Tac. lieux élevés. % Heights, elevations, Commands, orders
aedituus -- a custodian of a temple, sacristan, poets
aeditua -- a female overseer of a temple
aedituo -- Tempelhüter sein
__aemul
aemulor -- to rival, vie with, emulate, strive to excel, To envy, be jealous of
aemulo -- c. aemulor, āri.
__aer2
aerarium -- part of the temple of Saturn at Rome, in which the public treasure was kept, the treasury, the public treasure, finances, to render an account to the treasury, a fund reserved for extreme public necessity, a special fund
aeraria -- a mine
__aest
aestiua -- a summer camp, summer resort, a pleasure camp, time spent in a summer camp, a campaign, season for military operations, summer pastures for cattle, whole pastures, flocks
aestiuo -- to spend, pass the summer in a place
__alb
albico -- to be white
albicasco -- to become white, to grow clear
__alien
alieno -- to make strange, make another's, transfer, make over, part with, To make subject to another, give up, lose, subjected to a foreign power, to alienate, estrange, set at variance, estranged, ab, to have an aversion for, shrink from, To alienate, deprive of reason, make delirious, drive mad
alienum -- the property of a stranger, another's possessions:
__mitt
amitto -- to send away, dismiss, part with, To let go, let slip, to loose, let slip, to break one's word, to lose, the support of the aristocrats, to be more assured that she is lost
emitto -- to send out, send forth
__nul#
annulus -- one year old;
renulus -- Th.-Prisc. petit rein.
renuli -- reins
__antiqu
antiquo -- to reject, not to pass
antiqui -- the ancients, esp. the ancient writers
antiquum -- antiquity, the things of olden times
__aratr
aratrum -- a plough, to destroy utterly, to mark the boundaries
aratro -- to plough
__arc
arcula -- a small box, casket, treasures
arculus -- Fest. coussinet rond (qu'on plaçait sur sa tête pour porter les vases sacrés).
__orc=arc
orcula -- a small tun, a cask
__argut
argutiae -- liveliness, animation, lively movements, brightness, acuteness, subtlety, wit, Shrewdness, cunning
arguto -- to prattle, prate:
argutor -- to make a noise.*
__cup=cap
aucupium -- bird-catching, fowling, a new kind of fowling, game-birds, a quibbling
aucupor -- to be a birdcatcher, chase, hunt, strive after, catch
aucupo -- Pass.
__augur
augurium -- the observance of omens, interpretation of omens, divination, augury, An omen, sign, event interpreted by augury, A prediction, forecast, foreboding, the fulfilment
auguror -- to act as augur, augur, predict, foretell, To surmise, imagine, conjecture, suppose
auguro -- to act as augur, take the auguries of, consult by augury, absol. impers., after augury, under the sanction of auguries, To imagine, conjecture, forebode, To consecrate by auguries
__aurig
auriga -- a charioteer, driver, V.:
aurigo -- to drive/race a chariot;
aurigor -- to be a charioteer, a contender in the chariot-race, to drive a chariot, to contend in the chariot-race.
__auxil
auxilior -- to give help, aid, assist, succor, to cure
auxilium -- help, aid, assistance, support, succor, means of avoiding, sources of aid, auxiliary troops, auxiliaries, Military force, troops
auxilio -- pass.
__art
I- to fit close, to drive in tight II- to indue with art;, skilled in arts., endowed with cunning, artful % to contract, straiten % a narrow place, passage % disséquer
coarto -- to press together, compress, contract, confine, to abridge, shorten, to abridge, compress
deartuo -- to dismember, to rend limb by limb;, to ruin
adarto -- resserrer
inarto -- tr., resserrer, diminuer
__ept
coepto -- to begin eagerly, begin, undertake, attempt
coeptum -- a work begun, beginning, undertaking
__ept2
ineptio -- to be absurd, trifle, play the fool
ineptiae -- sillinesses, fooleries, trifles, absurdities
__erc
to proceed to the division of an inheritance, to divide an inheritance.
coerceo -- to enclose on all sides, hold together, surround, encompass, To restrain, confine, shut in, hold, repress, control, controls, to control, confine, restrain, limit, To hold in check, curb, restrain, tame, correct, of maintaining order, corrected
exerceo -- to drive, keep busy, keep at work, oversee, work, agitate, keep agoing, employ in labor, to engage busily, occupy, employ, exercise, train, discipline, in whose honor, of exercising ourselves, To practise, follow, exercise, employ oneself about, make use of, ply, mock fights, To follow up, follow out, prosecute, carry into effect, practise, administer, solemnize, To disturb, disquiet, vex, plague
aberceo -- - tr. - empêcher, tenir éloigné, éloigner.
__em
emercor -- to buy up, bribe
__ch#
concha -- a bivalve, shell - fish, mussel:
conchae -- s.-ent. sorte de coquillages.
trachia -- the windpipe, trachea
inchoo -- to begin, commence
occhi -- a kind of tree in Hyrcania, resembling the fig-tree, from which honey flowed in the morning, the manna sainfoin
echea -- vessels to increase the sound of the actors' voices in a theatre, sounding-vessels
__gr#
to crunk, crunkle
congruo -- to coincide, agree:
congrus -- a sea-eel, conger-eel
ingruo -- to break in, come violently, assault in force, fall upon
angrae -- vallon ou intervalle entre des arbres
agro -- tr., c. peragro, parcourir
__sue
consuesco -- to accustom, inure, habituate
dissuesco -- to disuse, to become disused, unaccustomed to
desuesco -- to forget/unlearn; to become/be unaccustomed to; to disaccustom; to lay aside custom/habit;
insuesco -- to habituate oneself, become accustomed, be inured
adsuesco -- to accustom, habituate:
__nub
c. uva.
conubium -- marriage, wedlock, with me, for his daughter's hand, The right of intermarriage, Sexual union
enubo -- to marry away, marry (to a stranger)
__cop
copula -- a band, rope, thong, tie, fastening, grapnel-hooks, A bond, tie
copulo -- to couple, bind, tie together, join, connect, unite, face to face, to join, connect, unite, to unite
copulor -- to couple, bind, tie together, to join, connect, unite
copulum -- Capel. c. copula.
__epul
epulae -- viands, sumptuous food, dishes, meats
epulor -- to feast, banquet, dine, as a dish
epulum -- a sumptuous meal, banquet, feast, dinner
apuliae -- toiles du théâtre (pour protéger du soleil).#
opulesco -- to grow rich#
opulus -- a kind of maple-tree#
__ron
corono -- to furnish with a garland, crown, wreathe, to be crowned in the Olympic games, To surround, encompass, enclose, encircle, shut in
corona -- a garland, chaplet, wreath
__delir
the earth thrown up between two furrows, a ridge % to plough, harrow in
deliro -- to be crazy, be deranged, be silly, dote, rave, whatever folly the kings commit
delirium -- madness, delirium
__nud
to make naked, strip, bare, lay bare, expose, uncover, to be threshed out, exposed on the stage, to leave uncovered, leave exposed, expose, deprive, To strip, spoil, plunder, to lay bare, expose, To lay bare, make visible, expose, betray, disclose, tells the sacrilege, and shows his pierced breast, To deprive, strip, impoverishes
denudo -- to lay bare, make naked, denude, uncover
renudo -- to uncover, make naked; to bare, strip
__sin
to let down, set, fix, To let, suffer, allow, permit, give leave, let be, forbear, be quiet, suffers to be dismayed, let him come, let me know, leave arms to men, Sy, De, would I let him?, let me alone % to bend, wind, curve, bow, swell out in curves, bend, extends in a curve % a bent surface, curve, fold, hollow, coil % a large vessel of earthenware, pot, jar
desino -- to leave off, give over, cease, desist, forbear
exsinuo -- to unfold, spread out, extend
insinuo -- to thrust in, push in, make a way
resina -- resin, rosin#
asinus -- an ass, C., L.&mdash;Fig., an ass, blockhead, dolt:#
asina -- she-ass#
__aet#
diaeta -- a regular mode of living, diet
abaeto -- - intr. - s'en aller.
coaeto -- - intr. - Tert. être du même âge.
__mid#
dimidio -- to halve, divide in half/two; to divide into two equal parts (L+S);
dimidia -- the half
5400
dimidium -- the half, was hardly half through, by half, well begun is half done
__de
semideus -- half-divine;
semidea -- a demigoddess
__di
semidies -- a half-day
__rim
a cleft, crack, chink, fissure, are cracked, opening, stop up, a flash of lightning, can conceal nothing % to lay open, tear up, turn up, grub through, To tear up, turn over, pry into, search, examine, explore, ransack, to examine thoroughly, investigate, scrutinize, ferret out % c. rimor / avec sens passif
dirimo -- to take apart, part, separate, divide, cut off, whom the torrid zone parts, to stand between, to break off, interrupt, disturb, put off, delay, to end, To separate, dissolve, break off, To interrupt, disturb, break up, To destroy, frustrate, bring to naught
irrimor -- to explore
__mend
emendo -- to free from faults, correct, improve, amend, To correct, revise, To atone for, compensate for
amendo -- - tr. - éloigner, reléguer, renvoyer.#
__erg#
emergo -- to bring forth, bring to light, raise up
energia -- energy, efficiency
__migr
emigro -- to move, depart, emigrate
amigro -- to migrate:
__asc#
see ascea. % to take to oneself, adopt, accept: % to receive, adopt, select: % an axe.
enascor -- to grow up, grow out, sprout, spring up, arise
amasco -- to begin to love
deascio -- to hew, cut with an axe, to smoothe
exascio -- - tr. - 1 - dégrossir (avec la hache). - 2 - ébaucher.
exasceo -- - tr. - 1 - dégrossir (avec la hache). - 2 - ébaucher.
__epheb
ephebus -- a youth (strictly a Greek from 16 to 20 years of age)
ephebeum -- a hall set apart for the youth in the palaestra
ephebia -- Puberty
ephebium -- c. ephebeum.
__equ
equile -- horse-stable;
__aqu2
aquila -- an eagle:
__gnau
ignauia -- inactivity, laziness, idleness, sloth, listlessness, cowardice, worthlessness
ignauesco -- to grow inactive, slothful
__dut
indutiae -- a suspension of hostitities, truce, armistice, put an end to, during the truce
exdutae -- les dépouilles.??
__infim
abl. fem., that which fertilizes, manures, dung, ordure, excrement % a reeking substance, dung, manure, mire
infimo -- to bring down to the lowest level; to weaken, enfeeble; to refute, invalidate, annul;
infimum -- the lowest part, bottom
__os
osculo -- to kiss; to exchange kisses;
esculus -- the tallest species of oak, the winter, Italian oak, with edible acorns, sacred to Jupiter#
__fru
to derive enjoyment from, enjoy, delight in, contentment, your society, to have the use and enjoyment of, have the usufruct % to rub, break, crumble into small pieces
perfruor -- to enjoy fully, be delighted
defruor -- to use up, consume by enjoying, defrui, deamare, deperire
__fri
perfrio -- to rub to pieces, to crumble up
confrio -- to rub in
adfrio -- to rub, crumble to pieces, to crumble over
infrio -- to rub into, crumble into, strew upon
__uu#
reduuia -- a hang-nail, loose finger-nail, to be engrossed by a trifle
exuuiae -- that which is stripped off, clothing, equipments, arms, his slough, skin, hair, Spoils, booty
exuuium -- spoils, booty
__med
to heal, cure, remedy, be good for, the healing art, to remedy, succor, relieve, amend, correct, restore, by opposition, defend the life, provide against % c. medeor. % to halve, divide in the middle
remedium -- that which restores health, a cure, remedy, antidote, medicine, a means of aid, assistance, remedy, help, cure
remedio -- - tr. - guérir.
remedior -- to heal, cure, remedy
__mig
remigium -- an oar-plying, rowing, Rowing apparatus, the oars, oars that can be shifted, Oarsmen, rowers
remigo -- to ply the oar, row, to rowers
__nid=nit
a nest
renideo -- to shine again, shine back, glitter, glisten, be bright, be resplendent
renidesco -- to grow bright, to shine
__dar#
sudarium -- a handkerchief
odarium -- a song, ode
__esc#
a dish, food, victuals, viands, meat, bait, course % to eat
suesco -- to become used, accustom oneself, To accustom, to be wont, be accustomed
adesco -- to feed, fatten
anesco -- - intr. - Plaut. devenir vieille, être vieille.
inesco -- to allure with bait, entice, to entice, deceive
__aethr
aethra -- the ether, sky, air:
aethria -- Aethria (ancien nom de l'île de Thasos).cc
__altar
altare -- altar (usu. pl.), fitting for burnt offerings; burnt offering; high altar;
altaria -- a high altar, altar for sacrifice to the great gods, as high altars to Phoebus, sacrifices
altarium -- Abl.
__annon
annona -- the year's produce, out of the annual supply, Means of subsistence, provisions, corn, grain, crop, is dear, scarcity, resources of our market, abundance, the price, market, former prices, to relieve scarcity, a storehouse against fluctuations in price, the market price
annono -- - tr. - Ps.-Aug. approvisionner.
annonor -- to collect provisions
__auror
aurora -- the morning, dawn, daybreak, the goddess of morning, The East, Orient
auroresco -- - intr. - avoir l'éclat de l'aurore, commencer à poindre.
auroro -- - intr. - avoir l'éclat de l'aurore.
__colon
colonia -- a colony, colonial town, settlement, Persons sent out for settlement, a colony, colonists, planters
colonus -- a husbandman, tiller of the soil, oxen, A farmer, peasant, A settler, colonist, by bringing as settlers subjects of Acrisius*
colona -- a countrywoman
__dag
indago -- to trace out, track, to investigate, explore, hunt for, trail
indagor -- c. indago, āre.
__pid#
oppidum -- a town, city, collection of dwellings, Rome, Athens, A provincial town, The inhabitants of a town
opidum -- 
__gin#
regina -- a queen, of Cleopatra, a queen, goddess, princess, noble-woman, of Ariadne, daughters of the, king, A noble woman, lady, a queen, mistress
angina -- Plaut. Cels. angine.
agino -- to move heaven and earth, to do one's best by hook or crook;
agina -- the opening in the upper part of a balance, in which the tongue moves
__tig
obtigo -- to cover over, cover up
__ting=tang
adtingo -- to wipe/smear on?;
__riu
a small stream, brook, make a mountain of a mole-hill, An artificial watercourse, canal, ditch, conduit, A stream, a stream, course % to lead, draw off
corriuo -- to lead/channel (water) into the same channel/basin, collect;
deriuo -- to lead off, turn away, to draw, derive, bring, To divert, turn aside, transfer
diriuo -- tr., faire dériver [t. de gram.]
eriuo -- to draw out, draw off
__moue
submoueo -- to put out of the way, drive back, drive off, send away, remove
obmoueo -- to move, bring forward, produce, offer
__moll
a pot, jar, the pot culls its own herbs
abolla -- a mantle, cloak,#
emollesco -- - intr. - devenir mou, s'amollir.
emollio -- to make soft, soften
__on#
absono -- - intr. - détonner.
redono -- to give back, restore, return
adonium -- a plant, a species of southernwood, Adonis horti
emoneo -- to admonish
__acerb
acerbo -- to aggravate, make worse
acerbum -- - 1 - amertume (de la mer). - 2 - contrariété. - 3 - le malheur.
__aug
to increase, augment, enlarge, spread, extend, accumulating, feed, to be changed into birds, offered additional gifts, to enrich, lengthened, Supin. acc., to magnify, exalt, praise, extol, To exaggerate, had exaggerated, To furnish abundantly, enrich, load, enriched by a loss, To honor, advance % to grow, increase in size/amount/number; to develop; to prosper; to rise/be swollen
adaugeo -- to increase by adding, augment:
adaugesco -- to grow, increase
exaugeo -- to increase greatly, confirm
__ham
a hook % a water-bucket, fire bucket % - tr. - pêcher à la ligne, prendre à l'hameçon.
adhamo -- to catch, secure, adamaverunt.
inhamo -- to fasten by a hook., to entangle, med.
__sug
to suck, to imbibe
adsugo -- to suck
desugo -- to suck from, to suck in
exsugeo -- c. exsugo.
5500
exsugo -- OR
__unc
the twelfth part, a twelfth, heir to one twelfth.&mdash;A trifle, bit, atom % to sound, roar like a bear
adunco -- - tr. - courber en dedans.
enuncio -- to say out, to divulge, disclose, to report, tell. To pronounce, utter#
inunco -- to hook, catch with hooks; to clutch, seize, grasp
obunco -- accrocher.
__agrar
agrarii -- the agrarian party, supporters of agrarian laws,
agrariae -- postes militaires dans la campagne
__albuc
albucium -- asphodèle.
albucus -- The bulb of the asphodel
albucum -- bulbe d'asphodèle / l'asphodèle
__lesc#
alesco -- to grow up, increase
olesco -- to grow
__ax#
- tr. - nommer.
ambaxium -- tas, monceau
coaxo -- to croak
anaxo -- tr., nommer
__amnac
amnacum -- an herbaceous plant, pellitory
amnacus -- c. parthenium
__amoen
amoeno -- to make pleasant, med.
amoena -- pleasant places
__ptr#
amptruo -- tourner, danser comme les prêtres saliens
aptra -- feuilles de vigne
__eth#
anethum -- dill, anise:
anethus -- c. anethum.
__angar
a rich sauce made of small fish
angaria -- the service of the, service to a lord, villanage
angario -- to demand something as, to exact villanage, med.
angarius -- a messenger, a courier
angarium -- c. angaria
__ill#
anilla -- c. anicula.
coillum -- the inmost part of the house, where the Lares were worshipped
obilla -- Apic. petite jarre.
suilla -- viande de porc.
__poch#
apocha -- the receipt of a creditor acknowledging the payment of a debt
apocho -- - intr. - C.-Th. donner quittance.
__apric
aprico -- to warm in the sun
apricor -- to sun oneself, bask in the sun
apricum -- place ensoleillée.
__qual#
corbeille, panier. % a wicker basket, work-basket
aquale -- aiguière.
aqualium -- jarre, cruche (à eau)
__quar#
aquarium -- abreuvoir, réservoir.
equaria -- a stud of horses
__arbut
arbutum -- the fruit of the arbu, tus, wild strawberry, The arbutus, strawberry-tree
arbutus -- the wild strawberrytree, arbutus
__arcub
arcubii -- P. Fest. sentinelles.
arcubius -- sentinelle
__arm
armita -- a virgin sacrificing, with the lappet of her toga thrown back over her shoulder#
armites -- soldiers of the rear-rank
__rsin#
arsineum -- a woman's headdress
orsinus -- a kind of crocus
__rter#
arterium -- trachée-artère.
arteria -- the windpipe. &mdash; An artery.
__aruen
aruena -- v. adv-.
aruenio -- v. adv-.
__uiar#
auiarium -- a poultry-yard, the wild haunts of birds
ouiaria -- a flock of sheep
__uill#
a country-house, country-seat, farm, villa, a public building in the Campus Martius % a sup of wine % a tuft of hair, shaggy hair, wool, fleece, with the nap shorn
auillus -- Gloss. agneau nouvellement né.
ouilla -- viande de mouton
__acet
whale; porpoise; dolphin; its flesh; sea monster (offered Andromeda);
cocetum -- a kind of food prepared from honey and poppies#
acetum -- vinegar, spoiled, wit, shrewdness
acetasco -- to become sour
aceto -- c. agito.
__chl#
cochlea -- a snail
cochleae -- c. cochlacae
__coinqu
coinquio -- to cut off, cut down
coinquo -- tr., émonder [des arbres sacrés]
__lob#
écale, balle. % The haulm, straw of Indian millet
colobium -- tunique à manches courtes.
colobum -- an undergarment with short sleeves
__lur#
a thong;, the mouth of a skin, leathern bag % oxymel
coluri -- les colures (deux grands cercles, qui coupent l'équateur et le zodiaque en deux parties égales et qui marquent, l'un les solstices, l'autre les équinoxes).
coluria -- piliers de pierre, pilastres.
__et#
cometa -- comète.
coetus -- a coming together, An assemblage, crowd, company, a festival, feast
emetior -- to measure out; to pass through
emeto -- to mow away, mow down
anetum -- aneth (plante aromatique).
suetum -- a custom, usage
oetor -- To use, make use of, employ
oetum -- an Egyptian plant, otherwise unknown
__is#
comisor -- to hold a festive procession, to revel, make merry;, Absol.
anisum -- anise, all powerful
__gl#
resserrer, contracter.
conglisco -- to be kindled up, to become illustrious
perglisco -- to become quite fat
reglesco -- to grow up, increase, augment
__offzz
__op
poppyjuice, opium
conopeum -- a gauze net, mosquito-curtain, canopy:
inopia -- want, lack, scarcity, Want, need, indigence, poverty, scarcity, famine, by keeping unsatisfied, A scant supply, scarcity, Want, helplessness, embarrassment, the unprotected, poverty, barrenness
__rul
corulus -- see corylus
arula -- a small altar
__ryc
coryceum -- the place in the pal&aelig;stra where the, exercised themselves by striking a suspended sack filled with fig-grains, flour, sand
corycus -- (prop., a sack of sand for athletes), a means of exercise, discipline
__ryz
coryza -- a catarrh
obryza -- standard gold
obryzum -- pure gold
oryza -- rice
__alb$
to be white, at dawn % to become white, whiten: % blanchir. % to make white
dealbo -- to whiten, whitewash, plaster
exalbesco -- to turn pale
exalbo -- to make white
inalbeo -- to be white, light
inalbesco -- to become white, pale
inalbo -- to make white, light, to whiten, brighten
__hor
an hour (one twelfth of the day between sunrise and sunset) % a small vessel, a fishing-smack % - tr. - exciter, stimuler.
dehorio -- To skim off
ahorus -- Tert. mort avant l'âge.
__lan
spin wool % to tear in pieces, rend, mangle, lacerate % to bear, wear wool
delanio -- - tr. - déchirer, mettre en pièces, découper.
5600
dilanio -- to tear to pieces, mutilate
__occ$
to harrow (ground); % a harrow
deocco -- to harrow in
inocco -- to harrow in
__pod
a rope fastened to one of the lower corners of a sail, for the purpose of setting it to the wind;, a sheet % an elevated place, height.&mdash;Esp., in the circus, a balcony
dipodia -- dipodie [métrique]
epodes -- a kind of sea-fish
__diurn$
a vessel of baked clay, vessel for drawing water, water-pot, water-jar, urn, A voting-urn, ballot-box, An urn for lots, vessel for drawing lots, A vessel for the ashes of the dead, cinerary urn, A money-pot, money-jar, an urna, half an amphora
diurnum -- a daily portion, allowance, rations
diurno -- to last long, exist long
__diuin$
a plantation of vines, vine-garden, vineyard, A vine, an arbor-like shed for shelter, pent-house, mantlet % wine, sorts of wine, wines, in abundance % wine.
diuina -- a prophetess
diuino -- to foresee, divine, foretell, predict, prophesy, expect, dread, conjecture, prophetic
diuinum -- The deity
couinus -- a war-chariot of the Britons and Belg&aelig;, a travelling chariot, a kind of tilbury#
ouina -- viande de mouton#
__flu$
to become fluid, to melt, dissolve, med. % to become fluid, to melt, dissolve, med.
effluesco -- to revel, riot
influesco -- int., couler dans
__gent
egentia -- pauvreté, indigence.
agentes -- a kind of secret police, frumentarii, curiosi
__acr$
emacresco -- to grow lean, to become emaciated
inacresco -- - intr. - Tert. grandir, croître.
__bol
a throw (of dice, etc.); hence, a haul, piece of luck:
embolium -- something thrown in;, an interlude, ballet
embolum -- the beak of a ship
__apor$
esclave femme. % a passage, channel in the body, the air passages
emporium -- a place of trade, market-town, market, mart#
aporia -- doubt, perplexity, embarrassment
aporior -- to be in uncertainty, to doubt, vacillate
__popt
epoptae -- beholders; persons fully initiated into the Eleusinian mysteries, who attained the third and highest grade, that of intuition
epopta -- épopte [suprêmement initié aux mystères d'Éleusis]
__scar
a sea-fish, scar, parrotfish (a delicacy)
escaria -- dishes, plate
escarus -- v. scarus.
__edr
exedra -- a hall furnished with seats, parlor
exedrium -- a sittingroom, parlor
__fol$
a leaf, gospel truth % c. folium
exfolio -- to strip of leaves
defolio -- tr., dépouiller de ses feuilles, effeuiller
__suc$
a juice, moisture, sap, liquor, oil, A medicinal drink, draught, potion, dose, Taste, flavor, savor, strength, vigor, energy, spirit, spirit, life, vigor
exsuco -- to deprive of juice, extract the juice of
insuco -- to soak in, to steep
__bul
imbulus -- Isid. lieu de promenade.
ebulum -- Dane-wort, dwarf-elder
ebulus -- Dane-wort, dwarf-elder
__du$
lutin, mauvais génies.
indusio -- to clothe
indusium -- a woman's under - garment
__du$
induuiae -- clothes, garments
induuies -- parure dont qqn est revêtu
__hum$
the earth, ground, soil, bit the ground, grass, A land, country, region % to be moist, damp, wet, part. pres. % to grow moist, wet % to cover with earth, inter, bury, performed his funeral rites, in funeral ceremonies
inhumo -- to bury in the ground, cover with earth, inhume
obhumo -- to cover with earth
__tib
a large shin-bone, tibia, shin, leg
intibum -- endive, succory
intibus -- c. intibum.
__tub
a trumpet, war-trumpet % c. tubicino % a pipe, tube.
intubum -- chicorée sauvage.
intubus -- c. intibum.
__tyb
intybum -- endive, succory
intybus -- c. intibum.
__uil$
to become worthless, bad, vile % v. villa.
inuilesco -- not to become bad
reuilesco -- to become vile, contemptible
euilesco -- to become vile, grow worthless
ouile -- a sheepfold, A fold for goats, An enclosure in the Campus Martius, where the votes were cast at the comitia
__od$
a public building aesigned for musical performances, an odeon % to hate, To dislike, be displeased with, be vexed, is discontented % hatred, grudge, ill-will, animosity, enmity, aversion, incur the hatred, excite, appease, what quarrel had I?, is so hated by, was so imbittered against, had offered as a prize for hostility, on an empty stomach, An object of hatred, offence, aversion, nuisance, one who hates him, I hate and am hated by, Discontent, dissatisfaction, disgust, Offensive conduct, odious language, importunity, insolence, vexatiousness, by insolent importunity, with that hateful conduct of yours, in insolence % a song, a lyric song, an ode % - tr. - Arn. Fest. Tert. haïr, détester, avoir en horreur.
perodi -- to hate greatly, to detest
enodo -- to free from obscurity, explain, elucidate, unfold#
exodium -- an after-play, farce#
__au
pathless region (pl.), wild waste, wilderness, desert; lonely/solitary places; % a grandmother
proauia -- f, a grandfather's, grandmother's mother, a great-grandmother
abauia -- mother of a great-grandfather, of a great-grandmother
suauio -- embrasser, baiser.
suauior -- to kiss
suauium -- a kiss; see savium
adauia -- aïeule au quatrième degré.
__pr
proprio -- to appropriate
proprium -- a possession, property
coprea -- a low buffoon, a filthy jester
apra -- a wild sow
__am$
to love, so help me the gods, in love with himself, To be in love, have an amour, to love, be fond of, find pleasure in, is constantly closed, to make homes, keep close to, to be obliged to, be under obligation, have to thank, I shall be under obligation to you, be so good, I pray, I entreat you, was well satisfied with myself, to be fond, be wont, be accustomed % a waterbucket, a firebucket % thon. % ammi, an umbelliferous plant, ammium, ext.
redamo -- to return love for love
adamo -- to fall in love with, conceive desire for, desire eagerly:
adama -- Hier. la race d'Adam, le genre humain.#
deamo -- to be in love with
examo -- cesser d'aimer
__reg=rex
a helmet, head-piece % to cover with a helmet.
regales -- Those belonging to a royal family, princes of the blood royal
regalia -- the residence of the king
__bac
a small round fruit, berry: % set, adorned with pearls, pearl
sebaceus -- a tallow-candle
sebacii -- Unschlitt-, Talglichter
__scl
sescla -- c. sextula
osclum -- a little mouth, pretty mouth, sweet mouth
__bor
kind of jasper
suborior -- to spring up, arise, proceed
aborior -- to pass away, disappear, be lost; to miscarry, be aborted; to set (sun/planet/star)
oborior -- to arise, appear, spring up
__cim
decimo -- To select by lot every tenth man for punishment, to decimate.
ocimum -- -I. basil -II. an herb which serves for fodder, a sort of clover
ocimus -- c. ocimum
__en
to swim out, swim away, escape by swimming
surena -- a kind of fish
coena -- dinner/supper, principle Roman meal (evening); course; meal; company at dinner;
coeno -- to take a meal, to dine, eat
coenum -- S
abena -- courroie, lanière, bride, rênes.
exenia -- cadeaux.
aena -- chaudière.
aenum -- a bronze vessel
__ut$
to use, make use of, employ, profit by, take advantage of, enjoy, serve oneself with % Act. form only imp. utito, use, employ, make use of
abutor -- to use up, consume, spend, exhaust:
abuto -- v. abutor.
coutor -- to associate with, have dealings with#
deutor -- to maltreat#
emuto -- to change, alter#
__ador$
adorior -- to approach as an enemy, fall upon, assail, assault, attack:
adoro -- to call upon, entreat, supplicate, implore
adorea -- a prize of valor, praise, glory
adoreum -- spelt??
adoria -- - 1 - récompense en blé (donnée aux soldats). - 2 - par ext. gloire militaire, renommée, victoire.
5700
adorio -- to attack, to assail, pass., adoratam.
__odor$
odoro -- to make fragrant, perfume
odoror -- to smell at, smell out, scent, to aspire to, aim at, to be snuffing after.&mdash;To search out, trace out, investigate, To get a smattering of
__yt
adytum -- Usu.
adytus -- 
__aest$
aestuo -- to rage, burn, To be warm, be hot, burn, glow, to rise in waves, surge, seethes, smokes, To undulate, swell, be tossed, heave, to burn, be excited, be inflamed, for her, To waver, vacillate, hesitate, be in doubt
aestus -- an agitation, glow, heat, rage of fire, in midday heat, fever, summer, a heaving, swell, surge, boil up, breakers, The waves, billows, sea, tides, at low tide, tides of passion, Irresolution, uncertainty, hesitation
aestuor -- Hitze empfinden - in sorglicher Unruhe sein
__lap$
to turn into stone, make hard like stone, to petrify, harden
alapa -- a box on the ear, blow with the open hand:
alapo -- souffleter
alapor -- souffleter.
alapus -- a parasite, who submitted to the box on the ear for gold??
__syl
ture
asylum -- a place of refuge, sanctuary, asylum:
asyla -- a plant;
__ula
aulaeum -- embroidered stuff, tapestry.
aulaea -- c. aulaeum
__ir
anger, wrath, rage, ire, passion, indignation
curo -- to care for, take pains with, be solicitous for, look to, attend to, regard, have taken tender care of, refresh, indulge, refreshed, see to, avert, don't be anxious about that, take care of your health, made preparations, it shall be seen to, gerundive, to have done, see to, order, To administer, govern, preside over, command, commanded, To heal, cure, To attend to, adjust, settle, pay, pay to his order#
emiror -- to gaze at in wonder, stand aghast at
__dens$
denseo -- to make thick, thicken, pack, close, press, hurl a shower of, darkens
densesco -- int., s'épaissir, s'obscurcir
denso -- to make thick, thicken, press, pack, close
__not
leisure, vacant time, freedom from business, Ease, inactivity, idleness, Leisure, time, time to hear, when I have time, if you have time.&mdash;Rest, repose, quiet, peace, enjoyed calm repose, in times of peace, at their ease, The fruit of leisure, poems % a kind of mussel % to be at leisure, keep holiday, idle at home % a kind of owl, the horned owl
diota -- a twohandled vessel, wine-jar,#
enoto -- to mark out, note down
enotesco -- to become known abroad, to become known
__iul
v. iuli.
eiulo -- to wail, lament;
eiulor -- Prisc. c. ejulo.
__ec
ONE
eneco -- to kill off, exhaust, wear out, destroy, torment, plague
enecium -- meurtre
__xor
exorior -- to come out, come forth, spring up, rise, appear
exoro -- to move, prevail upon, persuade by entreaty, induce, appease
__rp
serpo -- to creep, crawl, to move slowly, pass imperceptibly, creep along, proceed gradually, to creep, crawl, extend gradually, grow imperceptibly, m&lt;*&gt;e way stealthily, spread abroad, increase, prevail, to crawl, be low
serpio -- serpo
__rct
arctus -- Big/Little Dipper/Bear, region of celestial pole; North lands/people/direction;
arcto -- to draw, press close together, to compress, contract
arctum -- espace étroit, lieu resserré.
erctum -- an inheritance, estate, patrimony;, to divide an inheritance
__lc
sulcus -- a furrow, A trench, ditch, A track, furrow, wake, trail
sulco -- to furrow, turn up, plough, To furrow, plough, cross, traverse, mark
alcea -- a species of mallows
olca -- 
__cat
Catus
acatium -- a light Greek boat
acatus -- a light vessel, boat, med.
__aqu$
water, rain-water, most unwholesome, boiling, into the river, an aqueduct, the right of way for water, against dropsy, the host, greasy water, the necessarie of life, to be excluded from civil society, be banished, the sea, on the coast, treat other themes, A brook, Rain, waters, a watering-place, baths, to Baiae.&mdash;A water-clock, measures, by the water-clock, there is a hitch, I am at a loss % to fetch water, Supin. acc.
adaquo -- to bring water to, to give to drink, pass., to be brought to drink
adaquor -- to obtain water, fetch water (once):
inaquo -- to turn into water
__as
adasia -- P. Fest. vieille brebis qui vient de mettre bas.
amasius -- a lover
__aegr$
aegreo -- to be ill
aegresco -- to fall sick, To grow worse, be exasperated
__agon$
agonium -- a victim, beast for sacrifice
agonia -- A victim
__hen
ahena -- chaudière.
ahenum -- chaudron, marmite.
__yl
amylo -- to mix with starch
amylum -- starch
__rch
archa -- Inscr. c. arca.
archium -- the archives
__zym
azyma -- pain sans levain
ozymum -- an herb which serves for fodder, a sort of clover
__opt$
copta -- a kind of cake made of pounded materials#
copto -- to choose, elect to something, to admit, re ceive into some body by election, to elect to an office
opto -- to choose, select, prefer, three for each ship, To wish, wish for, desire, demand, pray for
__rc
corcus -- a disease of the chest
dercea -- a plant, called also, a species of the
ercisco -- to proceed to the division of an inheritance, to divide an inheritance.
orca -- a large-bellied vessel, butt, tun
__rs
corsa -- bandeau (t. d'arch.).
corsae -- 
__bri$
a wine - vessel % a shrub, also called, and
debrio -- - tr. - Aug. enivrer complètement.
ebrio -- to make drunk, to intoxicate
__eben$
ebenum -- ébène.
ebenus -- WISE
__dul
edulium -- et ordint
eduleus -- grand mangeur
edulus -- grand mangeur
__ug
emugio -- to bellow out, cry aloud
augeo -- to increase, augment, enlarge, spread, extend, accumulating, feed, to be changed into birds, offered additional gifts, to enrich, lengthened, Supin. acc., to magnify, exalt, praise, extol, To exaggerate, had exaggerated, To furnish abundantly, enrich, load, enriched by a loss, To honor, advance
augesco -- to grow, increase in size/amount/number; to develop; to prosper; to rise/be swollen
eugium -- die Scheide - das weibliche Glied
__nud$
to wet, moisten
enudo -- to lay bare, to deprive of
inudo -- to wet, moisten#
__upl
euplea -- Plin. une plante inconnue.
euplia -- an unknown plant
__gnau=nauus$
v. navo.
ignauio -- to render inactive, slothful, dispirited
ignauo -- tr., rendre lâche
__ler
Fest. ornements d'or sur une tunique. % bagatelle, sornettes : Charis. Exc. 549, 20.
olero -- to plant with vegetables
oleror -- int., s'approvisionner de légumes
__let
death, annihilation, save from death, Ruin % to kill, slay
oleto -- to foul, defile
oletum -- -I. a place planted with olive-trees; an olive-yard -II. filth, dirt, excrement
__pim
opima -- gross, overloaded
opimo -- to fatten, make fat
__serr$
serro -- to saw, to saw up, saw in pieces
serra -- a saw
__cta
octaua -- 
octauae -- impôt du huitième
actaea -- a strong - smelling plant, herb Christopher
__aequ$
a mare % a horse, steed, charger, without a rider, mounted, will use extreme diligence, with horse and foot, with might and main, with their whole force, a chariot, A sea-horse, The Trojan Horse, a play of Livius Andronicus, treason.&mdash;The constellation Pegasus % to be in heat
aequo -- to make equal, equalize, raise, returns equal love, extend, abolished, play all night, kept step to the song, equally vested in the two parties, raise, distribute equally, made on equal terms, To place on an equality with, compare, to make level, even, smooth, make as long as the enemy's, To become equal, equal, come up to, attain, reach, to reach, grow as high as the ridges, speak worthily of the achievements, lament adequately, rival by his spirit, keep pace with, as swift as the winds, as fine as mist, draw even with her mate
aequum -- a plain, level:
__alb$
albeo -- to be white, at dawn
albesco -- to become white, whiten:
5800
albisco -- blanchir.
albo -- to make white
__alg$
alga -- sea-weed, H.&mdash;Prov. of worthlessness:*
algeo -- to be cold, feel cold:
algesco -- to catch cold
algus -- Varr. le froid.
__lu
alueus -- a hollow, cavity, excavation, a bed, channel, a trough, tray, a hold, hull, A small ship, boat, A bathroom, with a step at the bottom, which the bather could use as a seat, A bathing-tub, bathtub, A bee-hive
alueum -- sorte de baquet
__ard$
ardeo -- to be on fire, burn, blaze, be burned, to flash, sparkle, shine, to burn, glow, be inflamed, be afire, with zeal for racing, were full of fury, to desire ardently, to be afire with love, burn with love
ardesco -- to take fire, kindle, be inflamed, to gleam, light up, to be inflamed, take fire, grow furious, grows furious
arduum -- a steep place, steep, difficulty
ordior -- to begin a web, lay the warp, begin, commence, make a beginning, set about, undertake, thus began, describe, must begin with him#
ordeum -- barley#
ordia -- Lucr. commencements.#
__arm$
arma -- implements, outfit, instruments, tools, for making bread, the ship's tackle, Armor fitted to the body, defensive armor, on his shield, covered with his shield, implements of war, arms, weapons, under arms, means of protection, defence, weapons, covering, ways of attacking me, in war, foreign, battle, A side, party in war, Soldiers, troops, auxiliary troops
armo -- to furnish with weapons, arm, equip, to take arms, to furnish, fit out, equip, for war, to arm, equip, furnish, strengthen, help, proofs, with nonsense, To move to arms, excite, rouse, stir, moves you to kill
armus -- the shoulder, the side, the upper arm
__orb$
orbo -- to deprive, strip, spoil, rob, make destitute, To bereave
orba -- an orphan, a widow
__rn
orno -- to fit out, furnish, provide, supply, equip, get ready, prepare
ornus -- the wild mountain-ash
erneum -- a cake baked in an earthen pot
__cn
acna -- a measure, piece of land, feet square
acnua -- a measure, piece of land, feet square
__rq
arquo -- - tr. - courber en arc.
arquus -- c. arcus; - 1 - arc. - 2 - arc-en-ciel, iris. - 3 - arcade, arche, voûte, arc de triomphe. - 4 - arc de cercle, arc.
__rt
artio -- I- to fit close, to drive in tight II- to indue with art;, skilled in arts., endowed with cunning, artful
arto -- to contract, straiten
artum -- a narrow place, passage
artuo -- disséquer
__ta
ataui -- les ancêtres, les aïeux.
atauus -- a grandfather's grandfather, An ancestor, forefather
